SCENE I. Westminster Abbey. The First part of King Henry the Sixth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 1  | Act 1, Scene 1 
 Next scene  SCENE I. Westminster Abbey. 
 Dead March. Enter the Funeral of KING HENRY the  Fifth, attended on by Dukes of BEDFORD, Regent of  France; GLOUCESTER, Protector; and EXETER, Earl of WARWICK, the BISHOP OF WINCHESTER, Heralds,  & c  BEDFORD  Hung be the heavens with black, yield day to night! 
 Comets, importing change of times and states, 
 Brandish your crystal tresses in the sky, 
 And with them scourge the bad revolting stars 
 That have consented unto Henry's death! 
 King Henry the Fifth, too famous to live long! 
 England ne'er lost a king of so much worth. 
 GLOUCESTER  England ne'er had a king until his time. 
 Virtue he had, deserving to command: 
 His brandish'd sword did blind men with his beams: 
 His arms spread wider than a dragon's wings; 
 His sparking eyes, replete with wrathful fire, 
 More dazzled and drove back his enemies 
 Than mid-day sun fierce bent against their faces. 
 What should I say? his deeds exceed all speech: 
 He ne'er lift up his hand but conquered. 
 EXETER  We mourn in black: why mourn we not in blood? 
 Henry is dead and never shall revive: 
 Upon a wooden coffin we attend, 
 And death's dishonourable victory 
 We with our stately presence glorify, 
 Like captives bound to a triumphant car. 
 What! shall we curse the planets of mishap 
 That plotted thus our glory's overthrow? 
 Or shall we think the subtle-witted French 
 Conjurers and sorcerers, that afraid of him 
 By magic verses have contrived his end? 
 BISHOP 
 OF WINCHESTER  He was a king bless'd of the King of kings. 
 Unto the French the dreadful judgement-day 
 So dreadful will not be as was his sight. 
 The battles of the Lord of hosts he fought: 
 The church's prayers made him so prosperous. 
 GLOUCESTER  The church! where is it? Had not churchmen pray'd, 
 His thread of life had not so soon decay'd: 
 None do you like but an effeminate prince, 
 Whom, like a school-boy, you may over-awe. 
 BISHOP 
 OF WINCHESTER  Gloucester, whate'er we like, thou art protector 
 And lookest to command the prince and realm. 
 Thy wife is proud; she holdeth thee in awe, 
 More than God or religious churchmen may. 
 GLOUCESTER  Name not religion, for thou lovest the flesh, 
 And ne'er throughout the year to church thou go'st 
 Except it be to pray against thy foes. 
 BEDFORD  Cease, cease these jars and rest your minds in peace: 
 Let's to the altar: heralds, wait on us: 
 Instead of gold, we'll offer up our arms: 
 Since arms avail not now that Henry's dead. 
 Posterity, await for wretched years, 
 When at their mothers' moist eyes babes shall suck, 
 Our isle be made a nourish of salt tears, 
 And none but women left to wail the dead. 
 Henry the Fifth, thy ghost I invocate: 
 Prosper this realm, keep it from civil broils, 
 Combat with adverse planets in the heavens! 
 A far more glorious star thy soul will make 
 Than Julius Caesar or bright-- 

 Enter a Messenger  Messenger  My honourable lords, health to you all! 
 Sad tidings bring I to you out of France, 
 Of loss, of slaughter and discomfiture: 
 Guienne, Champagne, Rheims, Orleans, 
 Paris, Guysors, Poictiers, are all quite lost. 
 BEDFORD  What say'st thou, man, before dead Henry's corse? 
 Speak softly, or the loss of those great towns 
 Will make him burst his lead and rise from death. 
 GLOUCESTER  Is Paris lost? is Rouen yielded up? 
 If Henry were recall'd to life again, 
 These news would cause him once more yield the ghost. 
 EXETER  How were they lost? what treachery was used? 
 Messenger  No treachery; but want of men and money. 
 Amongst the soldiers this is muttered, 
 That here you maintain several factions, 
 And whilst a field should be dispatch'd and fought, 
 You are disputing of your generals: 
 One would have lingering wars with little cost; 
 Another would fly swift, but wanteth wings; 
 A third thinks, without expense at all, 
 By guileful fair words peace may be obtain'd. 
 Awake, awake, English nobility! 
 Let not sloth dim your horrors new-begot: 
 Cropp'd are the flower-de-luces in your arms; 
 Of England's coat one half is cut away. 
 EXETER  Were our tears wanting to this funeral, 
 These tidings would call forth their flowing tides. 
 BEDFORD  Me they concern; Regent I am of France. 
 Give me my steeled coat. I'll fight for France. 
 Away with these disgraceful wailing robes! 
 Wounds will I lend the French instead of eyes, 
 To weep their intermissive miseries. 

 Enter to them another Messenger  Messenger  Lords, view these letters full of bad mischance. 
 France is revolted from the English quite, 
 Except some petty towns of no import: 
 The Dauphin Charles is crowned king of Rheims; 
 The Bastard of Orleans with him is join'd; 
 Reignier, Duke of Anjou, doth take his part; 
 The Duke of Alencon flieth to his side. 
 EXETER  The Dauphin crowned king! all fly to him! 
 O, whither shall we fly from this reproach? 
 GLOUCESTER  We will not fly, but to our enemies' throats. 
 Bedford, if thou be slack, I'll fight it out. 
 BEDFORD  Gloucester, why doubt'st thou of my forwardness? 
 An army have I muster'd in my thoughts, 
 Wherewith already France is overrun. 

 Enter another Messenger  Messenger  My gracious lords, to add to your laments, 
 Wherewith you now bedew King Henry's hearse, 
 I must inform you of a dismal fight 
 Betwixt the stout Lord Talbot and the French. 
 BISHOP 
 OF WINCHESTER  What! wherein Talbot overcame? is't so? 
 Messenger  O, no; wherein Lord Talbot was o'erthrown: 
 The circumstance I'll tell you more at large. 
 The tenth of August last this dreadful lord, 
 Retiring from the siege of Orleans, 
 Having full scarce six thousand in his troop. 
 By three and twenty thousand of the French 
 Was round encompassed and set upon. 
 No leisure had he to enrank his men; 
 He wanted pikes to set before his archers; 
 Instead whereof sharp stakes pluck'd out of hedges 
 They pitched in the ground confusedly, 
 To keep the horsemen off from breaking in. 
 More than three hours the fight continued; 
 Where valiant Talbot above human thought 
 Enacted wonders with his sword and lance: 
 Hundreds he sent to hell, and none durst stand him; 
 Here, there, and every where, enraged he flew: 
 The French exclaim'd, the devil was in arms; 
 All the whole army stood agazed on him: 
 His soldiers spying his undaunted spirit 
 A Talbot! a Talbot! cried out amain 
 And rush'd into the bowels of the battle. 
 Here had the conquest fully been seal'd up, 
 If Sir John Fastolfe had not play'd the coward: 
 He, being in the vaward, placed behind 
 With purpose to relieve and follow them, 
 Cowardly fled, not having struck one stroke. 
 Hence grew the general wreck and massacre; 
 Enclosed were they with their enemies: 
 A base Walloon, to win the Dauphin's grace, 
 Thrust Talbot with a spear into the back, 
 Whom all France with their chief assembled strength 
 Durst not presume to look once in the face. 
 BEDFORD  Is Talbot slain? then I will slay myself, 
 For living idly here in pomp and ease, 
 Whilst such a worthy leader, wanting aid, 
 Unto his dastard foemen is betray'd. 
 Messenger  O no, he lives; but is took prisoner, 
 And Lord Scales with him and Lord Hungerford: 
 Most of the rest slaughter'd or took likewise. 
 BEDFORD  His ransom there is none but I shall pay: 
 I'll hale the Dauphin headlong from his throne: 
 His crown shall be the ransom of my friend; 
 Four of their lords I'll change for one of ours. 
 Farewell, my masters; to my task will I; 
 Bonfires in France forthwith I am to make, 
 To keep our great Saint George's feast withal: 
 Ten thousand soldiers with me I will take, 
 Whose bloody deeds shall make all Europe quake. 
 Messenger  So you had need; for Orleans is besieged; 
 The English army is grown weak and faint: 
 The Earl of Salisbury craveth supply, 
 And hardly keeps his men from mutiny, 
 Since they, so few, watch such a multitude. 
 EXETER  Remember, lords, your oaths to Henry sworn, 
 Either to quell the Dauphin utterly, 
 Or bring him in obedience to your yoke. 
 BEDFORD  I do remember it; and here take my leave, 
 To go about my preparation. 

 Exit  GLOUCESTER  I'll to the Tower with all the haste I can, 
 To view the artillery and munition; 
 And then I will proclaim young Henry king. 

 Exit  EXETER  To Eltham will I, where the young king is, 
 Being ordain'd his special governor, 
 And for his safety there I'll best devise. 

 Exit  BISHOP 
 OF WINCHESTER  Each hath his place and function to attend: 
 I am left out; for me nothing remains. 
 But long I will not be Jack out of office: 
 The king from Eltham I intend to steal 
 And sit at chiefest stern of public weal. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 1  | Act 1, Scene 1 
 Next scene 