SCENE III. Plains in Gascony. The First part of King Henry the Sixth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 1  | Act 4, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. Plains in Gascony. 
 Enter a Messenger that meets YORK. Enter YORK with trumpet and many Soldiers  YORK  Are not the speedy scouts return'd again, 
 That dogg'd the mighty army of the Dauphin? 
 Messenger  They are return'd, my lord, and give it out 
 That he is march'd to Bourdeaux with his power, 
 To fight with Talbot: as he march'd along, 
 By your espials were discovered 
 Two mightier troops than that the Dauphin led, 
 Which join'd with him and made their march for Bourdeaux. 
 YORK  A plague upon that villain Somerset, 
 That thus delays my promised supply 
 Of horsemen, that were levied for this siege! 
 Renowned Talbot doth expect my aid, 
 And I am lowted by a traitor villain 
 And cannot help the noble chevalier: 
 God comfort him in this necessity! 
 If he miscarry, farewell wars in France. 

 Enter Sir William LUCY  LUCY  Thou princely leader of our English strength, 
 Never so needful on the earth of France, 
 Spur to the rescue of the noble Talbot, 
 Who now is girdled with a waist of iron 
 And hemm'd about with grim destruction: 
 To Bourdeaux, warlike duke! to Bourdeaux, York! 
 Else, farewell Talbot, France, and England's honour. 
 YORK  O God, that Somerset, who in proud heart 
 Doth stop my cornets, were in Talbot's place! 
 So should we save a valiant gentleman 
 By forfeiting a traitor and a coward. 
 Mad ire and wrathful fury makes me weep, 
 That thus we die, while remiss traitors sleep. 
 LUCY  O, send some succor to the distress'd lord! 
 YORK  He dies, we lose; I break my warlike word; 
 We mourn, France smiles; we lose, they daily get; 
 All 'long of this vile traitor Somerset. 
 LUCY  Then God take mercy on brave Talbot's soul; 
 And on his son young John, who two hours since 
 I met in travel toward his warlike father! 
 This seven years did not Talbot see his son; 
 And now they meet where both their lives are done. 
 YORK  Alas, what joy shall noble Talbot have 
 To bid his young son welcome to his grave? 
 Away! vexation almost stops my breath, 
 That sunder'd friends greet in the hour of death. 
 Lucy, farewell; no more my fortune can, 
 But curse the cause I cannot aid the man. 
 Maine, Blois, Poictiers, and Tours, are won away, 
 'Long all of Somerset and his delay. 

 Exit, with his soldiers  LUCY  Thus, while the vulture of sedition 
 Feeds in the bosom of such great commanders, 
 Sleeping neglection doth betray to loss 
 The conquest of our scarce cold conqueror, 
 That ever living man of memory, 
 Henry the Fifth: whiles they each other cross, 
 Lives, honours, lands and all hurry to loss. 

 Exit  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 1  | Act 4, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 