SCENE III. Before Angiers. The First part of King Henry the Sixth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 1  | Act 5, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. Before Angiers. 
 Alarum. Excursions. Enter JOAN LA PUCELLE  JOAN LA PUCELLE  The regent conquers, and the Frenchmen fly. 
 Now help, ye charming spells and periapts; 
 And ye choice spirits that admonish me 
 And give me signs of future accidents. 

 Thunder  You speedy helpers, that are substitutes 
 Under the lordly monarch of the north, 
 Appear and aid me in this enterprise. 

 Enter Fiends  This speedy and quick appearance argues proof 
 Of your accustom'd diligence to me. 
 Now, ye familiar spirits, that are cull'd 
 Out of the powerful regions under earth, 
 Help me this once, that France may get the field. 

 They walk, and speak not  O, hold me not with silence over-long! 
 Where I was wont to feed you with my blood, 
 I'll lop a member off and give it you 
 In earnest of further benefit, 
 So you do condescend to help me now. 

 They hang their heads  No hope to have redress? My body shall 
 Pay recompense, if you will grant my suit. 

 They shake their heads  Cannot my body nor blood-sacrifice 
 Entreat you to your wonted furtherance? 
 Then take my soul, my body, soul and all, 
 Before that England give the French the foil. 

 They depart  See, they forsake me! Now the time is come 
 That France must vail her lofty-plumed crest 
 And let her head fall into England's lap. 
 My ancient incantations are too weak, 
 And hell too strong for me to buckle with: 
 Now, France, thy glory droopeth to the dust. 

 Exit 
 Excursions. Re-enter JOAN LA PUCELLE fighting hand  to hand with YORK. JOAN LA PUCELLE is taken. The French fly.  YORK  Damsel of France, I think I have you fast: 
 Unchain your spirits now with spelling charms 
 And try if they can gain your liberty. 
 A goodly prize, fit for the devil's grace! 
 See, how the ugly wench doth bend her brows, 
 As if with Circe she would change my shape! 
 JOAN LA PUCELLE  Changed to a worser shape thou canst not be. 
 YORK  O, Charles the Dauphin is a proper man; 
 No shape but his can please your dainty eye. 
 JOAN LA PUCELLE  A plaguing mischief light on Charles and thee! 
 And may ye both be suddenly surprised 
 By bloody hands, in sleeping on your beds! 
 YORK  Fell banning hag, enchantress, hold thy tongue! 
 JOAN LA PUCELLE  I prithee, give me leave to curse awhile. 
 YORK  Curse, miscreant, when thou comest to the stake. 

 Exeunt 
 Alarum. Enter SUFFOLK with MARGARET in his hand  SUFFOLK  Be what thou wilt, thou art my prisoner. 

 Gazes on her  O fairest beauty, do not fear nor fly! 
 For I will touch thee but with reverent hands; 
 I kiss these fingers for eternal peace, 
 And lay them gently on thy tender side. 
 Who art thou? say, that I may honour thee. 
 MARGARET  Margaret my name, and daughter to a king, 
 The King of Naples, whosoe'er thou art. 
 SUFFOLK  An earl I am, and Suffolk am I call'd. 
 Be not offended, nature's miracle, 
 Thou art allotted to be ta'en by me: 
 So doth the swan her downy cygnets save, 
 Keeping them prisoner underneath her wings. 
 Yet, if this servile usage once offend. 
 Go, and be free again, as Suffolk's friend. 

 She is going  O, stay! I have no power to let her pass; 
 My hand would free her, but my heart says no 
 As plays the sun upon the glassy streams, 
 Twinkling another counterfeited beam, 
 So seems this gorgeous beauty to mine eyes. 
 Fain would I woo her, yet I dare not speak: 
 I'll call for pen and ink, and write my mind. 
 Fie, de la Pole! disable not thyself; 
 Hast not a tongue? is she not here? 
 Wilt thou be daunted at a woman's sight? 
 Ay, beauty's princely majesty is such, 
 Confounds the tongue and makes the senses rough. 
 MARGARET  Say, Earl of Suffolk--if thy name be so-- 
 What ransom must I pay before I pass? 
 For I perceive I am thy prisoner. 
 SUFFOLK  How canst thou tell she will deny thy suit, 
 Before thou make a trial of her love? 
 MARGARET  Why speak'st thou not? what ransom must I pay? 
 SUFFOLK  She's beautiful, and therefore to be woo'd; 
 She is a woman, therefore to be won. 
 MARGARET  Wilt thou accept of ransom? yea, or no. 
 SUFFOLK  Fond man, remember that thou hast a wife; 
 Then how can Margaret be thy paramour? 
 MARGARET  I were best to leave him, for he will not hear. 
 SUFFOLK  There all is marr'd; there lies a cooling card. 
 MARGARET  He talks at random; sure, the man is mad. 
 SUFFOLK  And yet a dispensation may be had. 
 MARGARET  And yet I would that you would answer me. 
 SUFFOLK  I'll win this Lady Margaret. For whom? 
 Why, for my king: tush, that's a wooden thing! 
 MARGARET  He talks of wood: it is some carpenter. 
 SUFFOLK  Yet so my fancy may be satisfied, 
 And peace established between these realms 
 But there remains a scruple in that too; 
 For though her father be the King of Naples, 
 Duke of Anjou and Maine, yet is he poor, 
 And our nobility will scorn the match. 
 MARGARET  Hear ye, captain, are you not at leisure? 
 SUFFOLK  It shall be so, disdain they ne'er so much. 
 Henry is youthful and will quickly yield. 
 Madam, I have a secret to reveal. 
 MARGARET  What though I be enthrall'd? he seems a knight, 
 And will not any way dishonour me. 
 SUFFOLK  Lady, vouchsafe to listen what I say. 
 MARGARET  Perhaps I shall be rescued by the French; 
 And then I need not crave his courtesy. 
 SUFFOLK  Sweet madam, give me a hearing in a cause-- 
 MARGARET  Tush, women have been captivate ere now. 
 SUFFOLK  Lady, wherefore talk you so? 
 MARGARET  I cry you mercy, 'tis but Quid for Quo. 
 SUFFOLK  Say, gentle princess, would you not suppose 
 Your bondage happy, to be made a queen? 
 MARGARET  To be a queen in bondage is more vile 
 Than is a slave in base servility; 
 For princes should be free. 
 SUFFOLK  And so shall you, 
 If happy England's royal king be free. 
 MARGARET  Why, what concerns his freedom unto me? 
 SUFFOLK  I'll undertake to make thee Henry's queen, 
 To put a golden sceptre in thy hand 
 And set a precious crown upon thy head, 
 If thou wilt condescend to be my-- 
 MARGARET  What? 
 SUFFOLK  His love. 
 MARGARET  I am unworthy to be Henry's wife. 
 SUFFOLK  No, gentle madam; I unworthy am 
 To woo so fair a dame to be his wife, 
 And have no portion in the choice myself. 
 How say you, madam, are ye so content? 
 MARGARET  An if my father please, I am content. 
 SUFFOLK  Then call our captains and our colours forth. 
 And, madam, at your father's castle walls 
 We'll crave a parley, to confer with him. 

 A parley sounded. Enter REIGNIER on the walls  See, Reignier, see, thy daughter prisoner! 
 REIGNIER  To whom? 
 SUFFOLK  To me. 
 REIGNIER  Suffolk, what remedy? 
 I am a soldier, and unapt to weep, 
 Or to exclaim on fortune's fickleness. 
 SU FFOLK  Yes, there is remedy enough, my lord: 
 Consent, and for thy honour give consent, 
 Thy daughter shall be wedded to my king; 
 Whom I with pain have woo'd and won thereto; 
 And this her easy-held imprisonment 
 Hath gained thy daughter princely liberty. 
 REIGNIER  Speaks Suffolk as he thinks? 
 SUFFOLK  Fair Margaret knows 
 That Suffolk doth not flatter, face, or feign. 
 REIGNIER  Upon thy princely warrant, I descend 
 To give thee answer of thy just demand. 

 Exit from the walls  SUFFOLK  And here I will expect thy coming. 

 Trumpets sound. Enter REIGNIER, below  REIGNIER  Welcome, brave earl, into our territories: 
 Command in Anjou what your honour pleases. 
 SUFFOLK  Thanks, Reignier, happy for so sweet a child, 
 Fit to be made companion with a king: 
 What answer makes your grace unto my suit? 
 REIGNIER  Since thou dost deign to woo her little worth 
 To be the princely bride of such a lord; 
 Upon condition I may quietly 
 Enjoy mine own, the country Maine and Anjou, 
 Free from oppression or the stroke of war, 
 My daughter shall be Henry's, if he please. 
 SUFFOLK  That is her ransom; I deliver her; 
 And those two counties I will undertake 
 Your grace shall well and quietly enjoy. 
 REIGNIER  And I again, in Henry's royal name, 
 As deputy unto that gracious king, 
 Give thee her hand, for sign of plighted faith. 
 SUFFOLK  Reignier of France, I give thee kingly thanks, 
 Because this is in traffic of a king. 

 Aside  And yet, methinks, I could be well content 
 To be mine own attorney in this case. 
 I'll over then to England with this news, 
 And make this marriage to be solemnized. 
 So farewell, Reignier: set this diamond safe 
 In golden palaces, as it becomes. 
 REIGNIER  I do embrace thee, as I would embrace 
 The Christian prince, King Henry, were he here. 
 MARGARET  Farewell, my lord: good wishes, praise and prayers 
 Shall Suffolk ever have of Margaret. 

 Going  SUFFOLK  Farewell, sweet madam: but hark you, Margaret; 
 No princely commendations to my king? 
 MARGARET  Such commendations as becomes a maid, 
 A virgin and his servant, say to him. 
 SUFFOLK  Words sweetly placed and modestly directed. 
 But madam, I must trouble you again; 
 No loving token to his majesty? 
 MARGARET  Yes, my good lord, a pure unspotted heart, 
 Never yet taint with love, I send the king. 
 SUFFOLK  And this withal. 

 Kisses her  MARGARET  That for thyself: I will not so presume 
 To send such peevish tokens to a king. 

 Exeunt REIGNIER and MARGARET  SUFFOLK  O, wert thou for myself! But, Suffolk, stay; 
 Thou mayst not wander in that labyrinth; 
 There Minotaurs and ugly treasons lurk. 
 Solicit Henry with her wondrous praise: 
 Bethink thee on her virtues that surmount, 
 And natural graces that extinguish art; 
 Repeat their semblance often on the seas, 
 That, when thou comest to kneel at Henry's feet, 
 Thou mayst bereave him of his wits with wonder. 

 Exit  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 1  | Act 5, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 