SCENE I. London. The palace. The Third part of King Henry the Sixth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 3  | Act 4, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. London. The palace. 
 Enter GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, SOMERSET, and MONTAGUE  GLOUCESTER  Now tell me, brother Clarence, what think you 
 Of this new marriage with the Lady Grey? 
 Hath not our brother made a worthy choice? 
 CLARENCE  Alas, you know, 'tis far from hence to France; 
 How could he stay till Warwick made return? 
 SOMERSET  My lords, forbear this talk; here comes the king. 
 GLOUCESTER  And his well-chosen bride. 
 CLARENCE  I mind to tell him plainly what I think. 

 Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV, attended; QUEEN ELIZABETH, PEMBROKE, STAFFORD, HASTINGS, and others  KING EDWARD IV  Now, brother of Clarence, how like you our choice, 
 That you stand pensive, as half malcontent? 
 CLARENCE  As well as Lewis of France, or the Earl of Warwick, 
 Which are so weak of courage and in judgment 
 That they'll take no offence at our abuse. 
 KING EDWARD IV  Suppose they take offence without a cause, 
 They are but Lewis and Warwick: I am Edward, 
 Your king and Warwick's, and must have my will. 
 GLOUCESTER  And shall have your will, because our king: 
 Yet hasty marriage seldom proveth well. 
 KING EDWARD IV  Yea, brother Richard, are you offended too? 
 GLOUCESTER  Not I: 
 No, God forbid that I should wish them sever'd 
 Whom God hath join'd together; ay, and 'twere pity 
 To sunder them that yoke so well together. 
 KING EDWARD IV  Setting your scorns and your mislike aside, 
 Tell me some reason why the Lady Grey 
 Should not become my wife and England's queen. 
 And you too, Somerset and Montague, 
 Speak freely what you think. 
 CLARENCE  Then this is mine opinion: that King Lewis 
 Becomes your enemy, for mocking him 
 About the marriage of the Lady Bona. 
 GLOUCESTER  And Warwick, doing what you gave in charge, 
 Is now dishonoured by this new marriage. 
 KING EDWARD IV  What if both Lewis and Warwick be appeased 
 By such invention as I can devise? 
 MONTAGUE  Yet, to have join'd with France in such alliance 
 Would more have strengthen'd this our commonwealth 
 'Gainst foreign storms than any home-bred marriage. 
 HASTINGS  Why, knows not Montague that of itself 
 England is safe, if true within itself? 
 MONTAGUE  But the safer when 'tis back'd with France. 
 HASTINGS  'Tis better using France than trusting France: 
 Let us be back'd with God and with the seas 
 Which He hath given for fence impregnable, 
 And with their helps only defend ourselves; 
 In them and in ourselves our safety lies. 
 CLARENCE  For this one speech Lord Hastings well deserves 
 To have the heir of the Lord Hungerford. 
 KING EDWARD IV  Ay, what of that? it was my will and grant; 
 And for this once my will shall stand for law. 
 GLOUCESTER  And yet methinks your grace hath not done well, 
 To give the heir and daughter of Lord Scales 
 Unto the brother of your loving bride; 
 She better would have fitted me or Clarence: 
 But in your bride you bury brotherhood. 
 CLARENCE  Or else you would not have bestow'd the heir 
 Of the Lord Bonville on your new wife's son, 
 And leave your brothers to go speed elsewhere. 
 KING EDWARD IV  Alas, poor Clarence! is it for a wife 
 That thou art malcontent? I will provide thee. 
 CLARENCE  In choosing for yourself, you show'd your judgment, 
 Which being shallow, you give me leave 
 To play the broker in mine own behalf; 
 And to that end I shortly mind to leave you. 
 KING EDWARD IV  Leave me, or tarry, Edward will be king, 
 And not be tied unto his brother's will. 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  My lords, before it pleased his majesty 
 To raise my state to title of a queen, 
 Do me but right, and you must all confess 
 That I was not ignoble of descent; 
 And meaner than myself have had like fortune. 
 But as this title honours me and mine, 
 So your dislike, to whom I would be pleasing, 
 Doth cloud my joys with danger and with sorrow. 
 KING EDWARD IV  My love, forbear to fawn upon their frowns: 
 What danger or what sorrow can befall thee, 
 So long as Edward is thy constant friend, 
 And their true sovereign, whom they must obey? 
 Nay, whom they shall obey, and love thee too, 
 Unless they seek for hatred at my hands; 
 Which if they do, yet will I keep thee safe, 
 And they shall feel the vengeance of my wrath. 
 GLOUCESTER  [Aside]  I hear, yet say not much, but think the more. 

 Enter a Post  KING EDWARD IV  Now, messenger, what letters or what news 
 From France? 
 Post  My sovereign liege, no letters; and few words, 
 But such as I, without your special pardon, 
 Dare not relate. 
 KING EDWARD IV  Go to, we pardon thee: therefore, in brief, 
 Tell me their words as near as thou canst guess them. 
 What answer makes King Lewis unto our letters? 
 Post  At my depart, these were his very words: 
 'Go tell false Edward, thy supposed king, 
 That Lewis of France is sending over masquers 
 To revel it with him and his new bride.' 
 KING EDWARD IV  Is Lewis so brave? belike he thinks me Henry. 
 But what said Lady Bona to my marriage? 
 Post  These were her words, utter'd with mad disdain: 
 'Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly, 
 I'll wear the willow garland for his sake.' 
 KING EDWARD IV  I blame not her, she could say little less; 
 She had the wrong. But what said Henry's queen? 
 For I have heard that she was there in place. 
 Post  'Tell him,' quoth she, 'my mourning weeds are done, 
 And I am ready to put armour on.' 
 KING EDWARD IV  Belike she minds to play the Amazon. 
 But what said Warwick to these injuries? 
 Post  He, more incensed against your majesty 
 Than all the rest, discharged me with these words: 
 'Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong, 
 And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.' 
 KING EDWARD IV  Ha! durst the traitor breathe out so proud words? 
 Well I will arm me, being thus forewarn'd: 
 They shall have wars and pay for their presumption. 
 But say, is Warwick friends with Margaret? 
 Post  Ay, gracious sovereign; they are so link'd in 
 friendship 
 That young Prince Edward marries Warwick's daughter. 
 CLARENCE  Belike the elder; Clarence will have the younger. 
 Now, brother king, farewell, and sit you fast, 
 For I will hence to Warwick's other daughter; 
 That, though I want a kingdom, yet in marriage 
 I may not prove inferior to yourself. 
 You that love me and Warwick, follow me. 

 Exit CLARENCE, and SOMERSET follows  GLOUCESTER  [Aside]  Not I: 
 My thoughts aim at a further matter; I 
 Stay not for the love of Edward, but the crown. 
 KING EDWARD IV  Clarence and Somerset both gone to Warwick! 
 Yet am I arm'd against the worst can happen; 
 And haste is needful in this desperate case. 
 Pembroke and Stafford, you in our behalf 
 Go levy men, and make prepare for war; 
 They are already, or quickly will be landed: 
 Myself in person will straight follow you. 

 Exeunt PEMBROKE and STAFFORD  But, ere I go, Hastings and Montague, 
 Resolve my doubt. You twain, of all the rest, 
 Are near to Warwick by blood and by alliance: 
 Tell me if you love Warwick more than me? 
 If it be so, then both depart to him; 
 I rather wish you foes than hollow friends: 
 But if you mind to hold your true obedience, 
 Give me assurance with some friendly vow, 
 That I may never have you in suspect. 
 MONTAGUE  So God help Montague as he proves true! 
 HASTINGS  And Hastings as he favours Edward's cause! 
 KING EDWARD IV  Now, brother Richard, will you stand by us? 
 GLOUCESTER  Ay, in despite of all that shall withstand you. 
 KING EDWARD IV  Why, so! then am I sure of victory. 
 Now therefore let us hence; and lose no hour, 
 Till we meet Warwick with his foreign power. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 3  | Act 4, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 