SCENE III. Edward's camp, near Warwick. The Third part of King Henry the Sixth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 3  | Act 4, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. Edward's camp, near Warwick. 
 Enter three Watchmen, to guard KING EDWARD IV's tent  First Watchman  Come on, my masters, each man take his stand: 
 The king by this is set him down to sleep. 
 Second Watchman  What, will he not to bed? 
 First Watchman  Why, no; for he hath made a solemn vow 
 Never to lie and take his natural rest 
 Till Warwick or himself be quite suppress'd. 
 Second Watchman  To-morrow then belike shall be the day, 
 If Warwick be so near as men report. 
 Third Watchman  But say, I pray, what nobleman is that 
 That with the king here resteth in his tent? 
 First Watchman  'Tis the Lord Hastings, the king's chiefest friend. 
 Third Watchman  O, is it so? But why commands the king 
 That his chief followers lodge in towns about him, 
 While he himself keeps in the cold field? 
 Second Watchman  'Tis the more honour, because more dangerous. 
 Third Watchman  Ay, but give me worship and quietness; 
 I like it better than a dangerous honour. 
 If Warwick knew in what estate he stands, 
 'Tis to be doubted he would waken him. 
 First Watchman  Unless our halberds did shut up his passage. 
 Second Watchman  Ay, wherefore else guard we his royal tent, 
 But to defend his person from night-foes? 

 Enter WARWICK, CLARENCE, OXFORD, SOMERSET, and French soldiers, silent all  WARWICK  This is his tent; and see where stand his guard. 
 Courage, my masters! honour now or never! 
 But follow me, and Edward shall be ours. 
 First Watchman  Who goes there? 
 Second Watchman  Stay, or thou diest! 

 WARWICK and the rest cry all, 'Warwick! Warwick!'  and set upon the Guard, who fly, crying, 'Arm! arm!' WARWICK and the rest following them 
 The drum playing and trumpet sounding, reenter  WARWICK, SOMERSET, and the rest, bringing KING  EDWARD IV out in his gown, sitting in a chair. RICHARD and HASTINGS fly over the stage  SOMERSET  What are they that fly there? 
 WARWICK  Richard and Hastings: let them go; here is The duke. 
 KING EDWARD IV  The duke! Why, Warwick, when we parted, 
 Thou call'dst me king. 
 WARWICK  Ay, but the case is alter'd: 
 When you disgraced me in my embassade, 
 Then I degraded you from being king, 
 And come now to create you Duke of York. 
 Alas! how should you govern any kingdom, 
 That know not how to use ambassadors, 
 Nor how to be contented with one wife, 
 Nor how to use your brothers brotherly, 
 Nor how to study for the people's welfare, 
 Nor how to shroud yourself from enemies? 
 KING EDWARD IV  Yea, brother of Clarence, are thou here too? 
 Nay, then I see that Edward needs must down. 
 Yet, Warwick, in despite of all mischance, 
 Of thee thyself and all thy complices, 
 Edward will always bear himself as king: 
 Though fortune's malice overthrow my state, 
 My mind exceeds the compass of her wheel. 
 WARWICK  Then, for his mind, be Edward England's king: 

 Takes off his crown  But Henry now shall wear the English crown, 
 And be true king indeed, thou but the shadow. 
 My Lord of Somerset, at my request, 
 See that forthwith Duke Edward be convey'd 
 Unto my brother, Archbishop of York. 
 When I have fought with Pembroke and his fellows, 
 I'll follow you, and tell what answer 
 Lewis and the Lady Bona send to him. 
 Now, for a while farewell, good Duke of York. 

 They lead him out forcibly  KING EDWARD IV  What fates impose, that men must needs abide; 
 It boots not to resist both wind and tide. 

 Exit, guarded  OXFORD  What now remains, my lords, for us to do 
 But march to London with our soldiers? 
 WARWICK  Ay, that's the first thing that we have to do; 
 To free King Henry from imprisonment 
 And see him seated in the regal throne. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 3  | Act 4, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 