SCENE IV. London. The palace. The Third part of King Henry the Sixth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 3  | Act 4, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE IV. London. The palace. 
 Enter QUEEN ELIZABETH and RIVERS  RIVERS  Madam, what makes you in this sudden change? 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  Why brother Rivers, are you yet to learn 
 What late misfortune is befall'n King Edward? 
 RIVERS  What! loss of some pitch'd battle against Warwick? 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  No, but the loss of his own royal person. 
 RIVERS  Then is my sovereign slain? 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  Ay, almost slain, for he is taken prisoner, 
 Either betray'd by falsehood of his guard 
 Or by his foe surprised at unawares: 
 And, as I further have to understand, 
 Is new committed to the Bishop of York, 
 Fell Warwick's brother and by that our foe. 
 RIVERS  These news I must confess are full of grief; 
 Yet, gracious madam, bear it as you may: 
 Warwick may lose, that now hath won the day. 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  Till then fair hope must hinder life's decay. 
 And I the rather wean me from despair 
 For love of Edward's offspring in my womb: 
 This is it that makes me bridle passion 
 And bear with mildness my misfortune's cross; 
 Ay, ay, for this I draw in many a tear 
 And stop the rising of blood-sucking sighs, 
 Lest with my sighs or tears I blast or drown 
 King Edward's fruit, true heir to the English crown. 
 RIVERS  But, madam, where is Warwick then become? 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  I am inform'd that he comes towards London, 
 To set the crown once more on Henry's head: 
 Guess thou the rest; King Edward's friends must down, 
 But, to prevent the tyrant's violence,-- 
 For trust not him that hath once broken faith,-- 
 I'll hence forthwith unto the sanctuary, 
 To save at least the heir of Edward's right: 
 There shall I rest secure from force and fraud. 
 Come, therefore, let us fly while we may fly: 
 If Warwick take us we are sure to die. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 3  | Act 4, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 