SCENE II. Sandal Castle. The Third part of King Henry the Sixth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 3  | Act 1, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. Sandal Castle. 
 Enter RICHARD, EDWARD, and MONTAGUE  RICHARD  Brother, though I be youngest, give me leave. 
 EDWARD  No, I can better play the orator. 
 MONTAGUE  But I have reasons strong and forcible. 

 Enter YORK  YORK  Why, how now, sons and brother! at a strife? 
 What is your quarrel? how began it first? 
 EDWARD  No quarrel, but a slight contention. 
 YORK  About what? 
 RICHARD  About that which concerns your grace and us; 
 The crown of England, father, which is yours. 
 YORK  Mine boy? not till King Henry be dead. 
 RICHARD  Your right depends not on his life or death. 
 EDWARD  Now you are heir, therefore enjoy it now: 
 By giving the house of Lancaster leave to breathe, 
 It will outrun you, father, in the end. 
 YORK  I took an oath that he should quietly reign. 
 EDWARD  But for a kingdom any oath may be broken: 
 I would break a thousand oaths to reign one year. 
 RICHARD  No; God forbid your grace should be forsworn. 
 YORK  I shall be, if I claim by open war. 
 RICHARD  I'll prove the contrary, if you'll hear me speak. 
 YORK  Thou canst not, son; it is impossible. 
 RICHARD  An oath is of no moment, being not took 
 Before a true and lawful magistrate, 
 That hath authority over him that swears: 
 Henry had none, but did usurp the place; 
 Then, seeing 'twas he that made you to depose, 
 Your oath, my lord, is vain and frivolous. 
 Therefore, to arms! And, father, do but think 
 How sweet a thing it is to wear a crown; 
 Within whose circuit is Elysium 
 And all that poets feign of bliss and joy. 
 Why do we finger thus? I cannot rest 
 Until the white rose that I wear be dyed 
 Even in the lukewarm blood of Henry's heart. 
 YORK  Richard, enough; I will be king, or die. 
 Brother, thou shalt to London presently, 
 And whet on Warwick to this enterprise. 
 Thou, Richard, shalt to the Duke of Norfolk, 
 And tell him privily of our intent. 
 You Edward, shall unto my Lord Cobham, 
 With whom the Kentishmen will willingly rise: 
 In them I trust; for they are soldiers, 
 Witty, courteous, liberal, full of spirit. 
 While you are thus employ'd, what resteth more, 
 But that I seek occasion how to rise, 
 And yet the king not privy to my drift, 
 Nor any of the house of Lancaster? 

 Enter a Messenger  But, stay: what news? Why comest thou in such post? 
 Messenger  The queen with all the northern earls and lords 
 Intend here to besiege you in your castle: 
 She is hard by with twenty thousand men; 
 And therefore fortify your hold, my lord. 
 YORK  Ay, with my sword. What! think'st thou that we fear them? 
 Edward and Richard, you shall stay with me; 
 My brother Montague shall post to London: 
 Let noble Warwick, Cobham, and the rest, 
 Whom we have left protectors of the king, 
 With powerful policy strengthen themselves, 
 And trust not simple Henry nor his oaths. 
 MONTAGUE  Brother, I go; I'll win them, fear it not: 
 And thus most humbly I do take my leave. 

 Exit 
 Enter JOHN MORTIMER and HUGH MORTIMER  Sir John and Sir Hugh Mortimer, mine uncles, 
 You are come to Sandal in a happy hour; 
 The army of the queen mean to besiege us. 
 JOHN MORTIMER  She shall not need; we'll meet her in the field. 
 YORK  What, with five thousand men? 
 RICHARD  Ay, with five hundred, father, for a need: 
 A woman's general; what should we fear? 

 A march afar off  EDWARD  I hear their drums: let's set our men in order, 
 And issue forth and bid them battle straight. 
 YORK  Five men to twenty! though the odds be great, 
 I doubt not, uncle, of our victory. 
 Many a battle have I won in France, 
 When as the enemy hath been ten to one: 
 Why should I not now have the like success? 

 Alarum. Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 3  | Act 1, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 