SCENE VII. Florence. The Widow's house. All's Well That Ends Well  Shakespeare homepage  |  All's Well That Ends Well  | Act 3, Scene 7 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE VII. Florence. The Widow's house. 
 Enter HELENA and Widow  HELENA  If you misdoubt me that I am not she, 
 I know not how I shall assure you further, 
 But I shall lose the grounds I work upon. 
 Widow  Though my estate be fallen, I was well born, 
 Nothing acquainted with these businesses; 
 And would not put my reputation now 
 In any staining act. 
 HELENA  Nor would I wish you. 
 First, give me trust, the count he is my husband, 
 And what to your sworn counsel I have spoken 
 Is so from word to word; and then you cannot, 
 By the good aid that I of you shall borrow, 
 Err in bestowing it. 
 Widow  I should believe you: 
 For you have show'd me that which well approves 
 You're great in fortune. 
 HELENA  Take this purse of gold, 
 And let me buy your friendly help thus far, 
 Which I will over-pay and pay again 
 When I have found it. The count he wooes your daughter, 
 Lays down his wanton siege before her beauty, 
 Resolved to carry her: let her in fine consent, 
 As we'll direct her how 'tis best to bear it. 
 Now his important blood will nought deny 
 That she'll demand: a ring the county wears, 
 That downward hath succeeded in his house 
 From son to son, some four or five descents 
 Since the first father wore it: this ring he holds 
 In most rich choice; yet in his idle fire, 
 To buy his will, it would not seem too dear, 
 Howe'er repented after. 
 Widow  Now I see 
 The bottom of your purpose. 
 HELENA  You see it lawful, then: it is no more, 
 But that your daughter, ere she seems as won, 
 Desires this ring; appoints him an encounter; 
 In fine, delivers me to fill the time, 
 Herself most chastely absent: after this, 
 To marry her, I'll add three thousand crowns 
 To what is passed already. 
 Widow  I have yielded: 
 Instruct my daughter how she shall persever, 
 That time and place with this deceit so lawful 
 May prove coherent. Every night he comes 
 With musics of all sorts and songs composed 
 To her unworthiness: it nothing steads us 
 To chide him from our eaves; for he persists 
 As if his life lay on't. 
 HELENA  Why then to-night 
 Let us assay our plot; which, if it speed, 
 Is wicked meaning in a lawful deed 
 And lawful meaning in a lawful act, 
 Where both not sin, and yet a sinful fact: 
 But let's about it. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  All's Well That Ends Well  | Act 3, Scene 7 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 