SCENE VI. Camp before Florence. All's Well That Ends Well  Shakespeare homepage  |  All's Well That Ends Well  | Act 3, Scene 6 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE VI. Camp before Florence. 
 Enter BERTRAM and the two French Lords  Second Lord  Nay, good my lord, put him to't; let him have his 
 way. 
 First Lord  If your lordship find him not a hilding, hold me no 
 more in your respect. 
 Second Lord  On my life, my lord, a bubble. 
 BERTRAM  Do you think I am so far deceived in him? 
 Second Lord  Believe it, my lord, in mine own direct knowledge, 
 without any malice, but to speak of him as my 
 kinsman, he's a most notable coward, an infinite and 
 endless liar, an hourly promise-breaker, the owner 
 of no one good quality worthy your lordship's 
 entertainment. 
 First Lord  It were fit you knew him; lest, reposing too far in 
 his virtue, which he hath not, he might at some 
 great and trusty business in a main danger fail you. 
 BERTRAM  I would I knew in what particular action to try him. 
 First Lord  None better than to let him fetch off his drum, 
 which you hear him so confidently undertake to do. 
 Second Lord  I, with a troop of Florentines, will suddenly 
 surprise him; such I will have, whom I am sure he 
 knows not from the enemy: we will bind and hoodwink 
 him so, that he shall suppose no other but that he 
 is carried into the leaguer of the adversaries, when 
 we bring him to our own tents. Be but your lordship 
 present at his examination: if he do not, for the 
 promise of his life and in the highest compulsion of 
 base fear, offer to betray you and deliver all the 
 intelligence in his power against you, and that with 
 the divine forfeit of his soul upon oath, never 
 trust my judgment in any thing. 
 First Lord  O, for the love of laughter, let him fetch his drum; 
 he says he has a stratagem for't: when your 
 lordship sees the bottom of his success in't, and to 
 what metal this counterfeit lump of ore will be 
 melted, if you give him not John Drum's 
 entertainment, your inclining cannot be removed. 
 Here he comes. 

 Enter PAROLLES  Second Lord  [Aside to BERTRAM]  O, for the love of laughter, 
 hinder not the honour of his design: let him fetch 
 off his drum in any hand. 
 BERTRAM  How now, monsieur! this drum sticks sorely in your 
 disposition. 
 First Lord  A pox on't, let it go; 'tis but a drum. 
 PAROLLES  'But a drum'! is't 'but a drum'? A drum so lost! 
 There was excellent command,--to charge in with our 
 horse upon our own wings, and to rend our own soldiers! 
 First Lord  That was not to be blamed in the command of the 
 service: it was a disaster of war that Caesar 
 himself could not have prevented, if he had been 
 there to command. 
 BERTRAM  Well, we cannot greatly condemn our success: some 
 dishonour we had in the loss of that drum; but it is 
 not to be recovered. 
 PAROLLES  It might have been recovered. 
 BERTRAM  It might; but it is not now. 
 PAROLLES  It is to be recovered: but that the merit of 
 service is seldom attributed to the true and exact 
 performer, I would have that drum or another, or 
 'hic jacet.' 
 BERTRAM  Why, if you have a stomach, to't, monsieur: if you 
 think your mystery in stratagem can bring this 
 instrument of honour again into his native quarter, 
 be magnanimous in the enterprise and go on; I will 
 grace the attempt for a worthy exploit: if you 
 speed well in it, the duke shall both speak of it. 
 and extend to you what further becomes his 
 greatness, even to the utmost syllable of your 
 worthiness. 
 PAROLLES  By the hand of a soldier, I will undertake it. 
 BERTRAM  But you must not now slumber in it. 
 PAROLLES  I'll about it this evening: and I will presently 
 pen down my dilemmas, encourage myself in my 
 certainty, put myself into my mortal preparation; 
 and by midnight look to hear further from me. 
 BERTRAM  May I be bold to acquaint his grace you are gone about it? 
 PAROLLES  I know not what the success will be, my lord; but 
 the attempt I vow. 
 BERTRAM  I know thou'rt valiant; and, to the possibility of 
 thy soldiership, will subscribe for thee. Farewell. 
 PAROLLES  I love not many words. 

 Exit  Second Lord  No more than a fish loves water. Is not this a 
 strange fellow, my lord, that so confidently seems 
 to undertake this business, which he knows is not to 
 be done; damns himself to do and dares better be 
 damned than to do't? 
 First Lord  You do not know him, my lord, as we do: certain it 
 is that he will steal himself into a man's favour and 
 for a week escape a great deal of discoveries; but 
 when you find him out, you have him ever after. 
 BERTRAM  Why, do you think he will make no deed at all of 
 this that so seriously he does address himself unto? 
 Second Lord  None in the world; but return with an invention and 
 clap upon you two or three probable lies: but we 
 have almost embossed him; you shall see his fall 
 to-night; for indeed he is not for your lordship's respect. 
 First Lord  We'll make you some sport with the fox ere we case 
 him. He was first smoked by the old lord Lafeu: 
 when his disguise and he is parted, tell me what a 
 sprat you shall find him; which you shall see this 
 very night. 
 Second Lord  I must go look my twigs: he shall be caught. 
 BERTRAM  Your brother he shall go along with me. 
 Second Lord  As't please your lordship: I'll leave you. 

 Exit  BERTRAM  Now will I lead you to the house, and show you 
 The lass I spoke of. 
 First Lord  But you say she's honest. 
 BERTRAM  That's all the fault: I spoke with her but once 
 And found her wondrous cold; but I sent to her, 
 By this same coxcomb that we have i' the wind, 
 Tokens and letters which she did re-send; 
 And this is all I have done. She's a fair creature: 
 Will you go see her? 
 First Lord  With all my heart, my lord. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  All's Well That Ends Well  | Act 3, Scene 6 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 