SCENE III. Rousillon. The COUNT's palace. All's Well That Ends Well  Shakespeare homepage  |  All's Well That Ends Well  | Act 5, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  SCENE III. Rousillon. The COUNT's palace. 
 Flourish. Enter KING, COUNTESS, LAFEU, the two French Lords, with Attendants  KING  We lost a jewel of her; and our esteem 
 Was made much poorer by it: but your son, 
 As mad in folly, lack'd the sense to know 
 Her estimation home. 
 COUNTESS  'Tis past, my liege; 
 And I beseech your majesty to make it 
 Natural rebellion, done i' the blaze of youth; 
 When oil and fire, too strong for reason's force, 
 O'erbears it and burns on. 
 KING  My honour'd lady, 
 I have forgiven and forgotten all; 
 Though my revenges were high bent upon him, 
 And watch'd the time to shoot. 
 LAFEU  This I must say, 
 But first I beg my pardon, the young lord 
 Did to his majesty, his mother and his lady 
 Offence of mighty note; but to himself 
 The greatest wrong of all. He lost a wife 
 Whose beauty did astonish the survey 
 Of richest eyes, whose words all ears took captive, 
 Whose dear perfection hearts that scorn'd to serve 
 Humbly call'd mistress. 
 KING  Praising what is lost 
 Makes the remembrance dear. Well, call him hither; 
 We are reconciled, and the first view shall kill 
 All repetition: let him not ask our pardon; 
 The nature of his great offence is dead, 
 And deeper than oblivion we do bury 
 The incensing relics of it: let him approach, 
 A stranger, no offender; and inform him 
 So 'tis our will he should. 
 Gentleman  I shall, my liege. 

 Exit  KING  What says he to your daughter? have you spoke? 
 LAFEU  All that he is hath reference to your highness. 
 KING  Then shall we have a match. I have letters sent me 
 That set him high in fame. 

 Enter BERTRAM  LAFEU  He looks well on't. 
 KING  I am not a day of season, 
 For thou mayst see a sunshine and a hail 
 In me at once: but to the brightest beams 
 Distracted clouds give way; so stand thou forth; 
 The time is fair again. 
 BERTRAM  My high-repented blames, 
 Dear sovereign, pardon to me. 
 KING  All is whole; 
 Not one word more of the consumed time. 
 Let's take the instant by the forward top; 
 For we are old, and on our quick'st decrees 
 The inaudible and noiseless foot of Time 
 Steals ere we can effect them. You remember 
 The daughter of this lord? 
 BERTRAM  Admiringly, my liege, at first 
 I stuck my choice upon her, ere my heart 
 Durst make too bold a herald of my tongue 
 Where the impression of mine eye infixing, 
 Contempt his scornful perspective did lend me, 
 Which warp'd the line of every other favour; 
 Scorn'd a fair colour, or express'd it stolen; 
 Extended or contracted all proportions 
 To a most hideous object: thence it came 
 That she whom all men praised and whom myself, 
 Since I have lost, have loved, was in mine eye 
 The dust that did offend it. 
 KING  Well excused: 
 That thou didst love her, strikes some scores away 
 From the great compt: but love that comes too late, 
 Like a remorseful pardon slowly carried, 
 To the great sender turns a sour offence, 
 Crying, 'That's good that's gone.' Our rash faults 
 Make trivial price of serious things we have, 
 Not knowing them until we know their grave: 
 Oft our displeasures, to ourselves unjust, 
 Destroy our friends and after weep their dust 
 Our own love waking cries to see what's done, 
 While shame full late sleeps out the afternoon. 
 Be this sweet Helen's knell, and now forget her. 
 Send forth your amorous token for fair Maudlin: 
 The main consents are had; and here we'll stay 
 To see our widower's second marriage-day. 
 COUNTESS  Which better than the first, O dear heaven, bless! 
 Or, ere they meet, in me, O nature, cesse! 
 LAFEU  Come on, my son, in whom my house's name 
 Must be digested, give a favour from you 
 To sparkle in the spirits of my daughter, 
 That she may quickly come. 

 BERTRAM gives a ring  By my old beard, 
 And every hair that's on't, Helen, that's dead, 
 Was a sweet creature: such a ring as this, 
 The last that e'er I took her at court, 
 I saw upon her finger. 
 BERTRAM  Hers it was not. 
 KING  Now, pray you, let me see it; for mine eye, 
 While I was speaking, oft was fasten'd to't. 
 This ring was mine; and, when I gave it Helen, 
 I bade her, if her fortunes ever stood 
 Necessitied to help, that by this token 
 I would relieve her. Had you that craft, to reave 
 her 
 Of what should stead her most? 
 BERTRAM  My gracious sovereign, 
 Howe'er it pleases you to take it so, 
 The ring was never hers. 
 COUNTESS  Son, on my life, 
 I have seen her wear it; and she reckon'd it 
 At her life's rate. 
 LAFEU  I am sure I saw her wear it. 
 BERTRAM  You are deceived, my lord; she never saw it: 
 In Florence was it from a casement thrown me, 
 Wrapp'd in a paper, which contain'd the name 
 Of her that threw it: noble she was, and thought 
 I stood engaged: but when I had subscribed 
 To mine own fortune and inform'd her fully 
 I could not answer in that course of honour 
 As she had made the overture, she ceased 
 In heavy satisfaction and would never 
 Receive the ring again. 
 KING  Plutus himself, 
 That knows the tinct and multiplying medicine, 
 Hath not in nature's mystery more science 
 Than I have in this ring: 'twas mine, 'twas Helen's, 
 Whoever gave it you. Then, if you know 
 That you are well acquainted with yourself, 
 Confess 'twas hers, and by what rough enforcement 
 You got it from her: she call'd the saints to surety 
 That she would never put it from her finger, 
 Unless she gave it to yourself in bed, 
 Where you have never come, or sent it us 
 Upon her great disaster. 
 BERTRAM  She never saw it. 
 KING  Thou speak'st it falsely, as I love mine honour; 
 And makest conjectural fears to come into me 
 Which I would fain shut out. If it should prove 
 That thou art so inhuman,--'twill not prove so;-- 
 And yet I know not: thou didst hate her deadly, 
 And she is dead; which nothing, but to close 
 Her eyes myself, could win me to believe, 
 More than to see this ring. Take him away. 

 Guards seize BERTRAM  My fore-past proofs, howe'er the matter fall, 
 Shall tax my fears of little vanity, 
 Having vainly fear'd too little. Away with him! 
 We'll sift this matter further. 
 BERTRAM  If you shall prove 
 This ring was ever hers, you shall as easy 
 Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence, 
 Where yet she never was. 

 Exit, guarded  KING  I am wrapp'd in dismal thinkings. 

 Enter a Gentleman  Gentleman  Gracious sovereign, 
 Whether I have been to blame or no, I know not: 
 Here's a petition from a Florentine, 
 Who hath for four or five removes come short 
 To tender it herself. I undertook it, 
 Vanquish'd thereto by the fair grace and speech 
 Of the poor suppliant, who by this I know 
 Is here attending: her business looks in her 
 With an importing visage; and she told me, 
 In a sweet verbal brief, it did concern 
 Your highness with herself. 
 KING  [Reads]  Upon his many protestations to marry me 
 when his wife was dead, I blush to say it, he won 
 me. Now is the Count Rousillon a widower: his vows 
 are forfeited to me, and my honour's paid to him. He 
 stole from Florence, taking no leave, and I follow 
 him to his country for justice: grant it me, O 
 king! in you it best lies; otherwise a seducer 
 flourishes, and a poor maid is undone. 
 DIANA CAPILET. 
 LAFEU  I will buy me a son-in-law in a fair, and toll for 
 this: I'll none of him. 
 KING  The heavens have thought well on thee Lafeu, 
 To bring forth this discovery. Seek these suitors: 
 Go speedily and bring again the count. 
 I am afeard the life of Helen, lady, 
 Was foully snatch'd. 
 COUNTESS  Now, justice on the doers! 

 Re-enter BERTRAM, guarded  KING  I wonder, sir, sith wives are monsters to you, 
 And that you fly them as you swear them lordship, 
 Yet you desire to marry. 

 Enter Widow and DIANA  What woman's that? 
 DIANA  I am, my lord, a wretched Florentine, 
 Derived from the ancient Capilet: 
 My suit, as I do understand, you know, 
 And therefore know how far I may be pitied. 
 Widow  I am her mother, sir, whose age and honour 
 Both suffer under this complaint we bring, 
 And both shall cease, without your remedy. 
 KING  Come hither, count; do you know these women? 
 BERTRAM  My lord, I neither can nor will deny 
 But that I know them: do they charge me further? 
 DIANA  Why do you look so strange upon your wife? 
 BERTRAM  She's none of mine, my lord. 
 DIANA  If you shall marry, 
 You give away this hand, and that is mine; 
 You give away heaven's vows, and those are mine; 
 You give away myself, which is known mine; 
 For I by vow am so embodied yours, 
 That she which marries you must marry me, 
 Either both or none. 
 LAFEU  Your reputation comes too short for my daughter; you 
 are no husband for her. 
 BERTRAM  My lord, this is a fond and desperate creature, 
 Whom sometime I have laugh'd with: let your highness 
 Lay a more noble thought upon mine honour 
 Than for to think that I would sink it here. 
 KING  Sir, for my thoughts, you have them ill to friend 
 Till your deeds gain them: fairer prove your honour 
 Than in my thought it lies. 
 DIANA  Good my lord, 
 Ask him upon his oath, if he does think 
 He had not my virginity. 
 KING  What say'st thou to her? 
 BERTRAM  She's impudent, my lord, 
 And was a common gamester to the camp. 
 DIANA  He does me wrong, my lord; if I were so, 
 He might have bought me at a common price: 
 Do not believe him. O, behold this ring, 
 Whose high respect and rich validity 
 Did lack a parallel; yet for all that 
 He gave it to a commoner o' the camp, 
 If I be one. 
 COUNTESS  He blushes, and 'tis it: 
 Of six preceding ancestors, that gem, 
 Conferr'd by testament to the sequent issue, 
 Hath it been owed and worn. This is his wife; 
 That ring's a thousand proofs. 
 KING  Methought you said 
 You saw one here in court could witness it. 
 DIANA  I did, my lord, but loath am to produce 
 So bad an instrument: his name's Parolles. 
 LAFEU  I saw the man to-day, if man he be. 
 KING  Find him, and bring him hither. 

 Exit an Attendant  BERTRAM  What of him? 
 He's quoted for a most perfidious slave, 
 With all the spots o' the world tax'd and debosh'd; 
 Whose nature sickens but to speak a truth. 
 Am I or that or this for what he'll utter, 
 That will speak any thing? 
 KING  She hath that ring of yours. 
 BERTRAM  I think she has: certain it is I liked her, 
 And boarded her i' the wanton way of youth: 
 She knew her distance and did angle for me, 
 Madding my eagerness with her restraint, 
 As all impediments in fancy's course 
 Are motives of more fancy; and, in fine, 
 Her infinite cunning, with her modern grace, 
 Subdued me to her rate: she got the ring; 
 And I had that which any inferior might 
 At market-price have bought. 
 DIANA  I must be patient: 
 You, that have turn'd off a first so noble wife, 
 May justly diet me. I pray you yet; 
 Since you lack virtue, I will lose a husband; 
 Send for your ring, I will return it home, 
 And give me mine again. 
 BERTRAM  I have it not. 
 KING  What ring was yours, I pray you? 
 DIANA  Sir, much like 
 The same upon your finger. 
 KING  Know you this ring? this ring was his of late. 
 DIANA  And this was it I gave him, being abed. 
 KING  The story then goes false, you threw it him 
 Out of a casement. 
 DIANA  I have spoke the truth. 

 Enter PAROLLES  BERTRAM  My lord, I do confess the ring was hers. 
 KING  You boggle shrewdly, every feather stars you. 
 Is this the man you speak of? 
 DIANA  Ay, my lord. 
 KING  Tell me, sirrah, but tell me true, I charge you, 
 Not fearing the displeasure of your master, 
 Which on your just proceeding I'll keep off, 
 By him and by this woman here what know you? 
 PAROLLES  So please your majesty, my master hath been an 
 honourable gentleman: tricks he hath had in him, 
 which gentlemen have. 
 KING  Come, come, to the purpose: did he love this woman? 
 PAROLLES  Faith, sir, he did love her; but how? 
 KING  How, I pray you? 
 PAROLLES  He did love her, sir, as a gentleman loves a woman. 
 KING  How is that? 
 PAROLLES  He loved her, sir, and loved her not. 
 KING  As thou art a knave, and no knave. What an 
 equivocal companion is this! 
 PAROLLES  I am a poor man, and at your majesty's command. 
 LAFEU  He's a good drum, my lord, but a naughty orator. 
 DIANA  Do you know he promised me marriage? 
 PAROLLES  Faith, I know more than I'll speak. 
 KING  But wilt thou not speak all thou knowest? 
 PAROLLES  Yes, so please your majesty. I did go between them, 
 as I said; but more than that, he loved her: for 
 indeed he was mad for her, and talked of Satan and 
 of Limbo and of Furies and I know not what: yet I 
 was in that credit with them at that time that I 
 knew of their going to bed, and of other motions, 
 as promising her marriage, and things which would 
 derive me ill will to speak of; therefore I will not 
 speak what I know. 
 KING  Thou hast spoken all already, unless thou canst say 
 they are married: but thou art too fine in thy 
 evidence; therefore stand aside. 
 This ring, you say, was yours? 
 DIANA  Ay, my good lord. 
 KING  Where did you buy it? or who gave it you? 
 DIANA  It was not given me, nor I did not buy it. 
 KING  Who lent it you? 
 DIANA  It was not lent me neither. 
 KING  Where did you find it, then? 
 DIANA  I found it not. 
 KING  If it were yours by none of all these ways, 
 How could you give it him? 
 DIANA  I never gave it him. 
 LAFEU  This woman's an easy glove, my lord; she goes off 
 and on at pleasure. 
 KING  This ring was mine; I gave it his first wife. 
 DIANA  It might be yours or hers, for aught I know. 
 KING  Take her away; I do not like her now; 
 To prison with her: and away with him. 
 Unless thou tell'st me where thou hadst this ring, 
 Thou diest within this hour. 
 DIANA  I'll never tell you. 
 KING  Take her away. 
 DIANA  I'll put in bail, my liege. 
 KING  I think thee now some common customer. 
 DIANA  By Jove, if ever I knew man, 'twas you. 
 KING  Wherefore hast thou accused him all this while? 
 DIANA  Because he's guilty, and he is not guilty: 
 He knows I am no maid, and he'll swear to't; 
 I'll swear I am a maid, and he knows not. 
 Great king, I am no strumpet, by my life; 
 I am either maid, or else this old man's wife. 
 KING  She does abuse our ears: to prison with her. 
 DIANA  Good mother, fetch my bail. Stay, royal sir: 

 Exit Widow  The jeweller that owes the ring is sent for, 
 And he shall surety me. But for this lord, 
 Who hath abused me, as he knows himself, 
 Though yet he never harm'd me, here I quit him: 
 He knows himself my bed he hath defiled; 
 And at that time he got his wife with child: 
 Dead though she be, she feels her young one kick: 
 So there's my riddle: one that's dead is quick: 
 And now behold the meaning. 

 Re-enter Widow, with HELENA  KING  Is there no exorcist 
 Beguiles the truer office of mine eyes? 
 Is't real that I see? 
 HELENA  No, my good lord; 
 'Tis but the shadow of a wife you see, 
 The name and not the thing. 
 BERTRAM  Both, both. O, pardon! 
 HELENA  O my good lord, when I was like this maid, 
 I found you wondrous kind. There is your ring; 
 And, look you, here's your letter; this it says: 
 'When from my finger you can get this ring 
 And are by me with child,'  & c. This is done: 
 Will you be mine, now you are doubly won? 
 BERTRAM  If she, my liege, can make me know this clearly, 
 I'll love her dearly, ever, ever dearly. 
 HELENA  If it appear not plain and prove untrue, 
 Deadly divorce step between me and you! 
 O my dear mother, do I see you living? 
 LAFEU  Mine eyes smell onions; I shall weep anon: 

 To PAROLLES  Good Tom Drum, lend me a handkercher: so, 
 I thank thee: wait on me home, I'll make sport with thee: 
 Let thy courtesies alone, they are scurvy ones. 
 KING  Let us from point to point this story know, 
 To make the even truth in pleasure flow. 

 To DIANA  If thou be'st yet a fresh uncropped flower, 
 Choose thou thy husband, and I'll pay thy dower; 
 For I can guess that by thy honest aid 
 Thou keep'st a wife herself, thyself a maid. 
 Of that and all the progress, more or less, 
 Resolvedly more leisure shall express: 
 All yet seems well; and if it end so meet, 
 The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet. 

 Flourish  EPILOGUE 
 KING  The king's a beggar, now the play is done: 
 All is well ended, if this suit be won, 
 That you express content; which we will pay, 
 With strife to please you, day exceeding day: 
 Ours be your patience then, and yours our parts; 
 Your gentle hands lend us, and take our hearts. 

 Exeunt 