SCENE IV. The Forest of Arden. As You Like It  Shakespeare homepage  |  As You Like It  | Act 2, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE IV. The Forest of Arden. 
 Enter ROSALIND for Ganymede, CELIA for Aliena, and TOUCHSTONE  ROSALIND  O Jupiter, how weary are my spirits! 
 TOUCHSTONE  I care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary. 
 ROSALIND  I could find in my heart to disgrace my man's 
 apparel and to cry like a woman; but I must comfort 
 the weaker vessel, as doublet and hose ought to show 
 itself courageous to petticoat: therefore courage, 
 good Aliena! 
 CELIA  I pray you, bear with me; I cannot go no further. 
 TOUCHSTONE  For my part, I had rather bear with you than bear 
 you; yet I should bear no cross if I did bear you, 
 for I think you have no money in your purse. 
 ROSALIND  Well, this is the forest of Arden. 
 TOUCHSTONE  Ay, now am I in Arden; the more fool I; when I was 
 at home, I was in a better place: but travellers 
 must be content. 
 ROSALIND  Ay, be so, good Touchstone. 

 Enter CORIN and SILVIUS  Look you, who comes here; a young man and an old in 
 solemn talk. 
 CORIN  That is the way to make her scorn you still. 
 SILVIUS  O Corin, that thou knew'st how I do love her! 
 CORIN  I partly guess; for I have loved ere now. 
 SILVIUS  No, Corin, being old, thou canst not guess, 
 Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover 
 As ever sigh'd upon a midnight pillow: 
 But if thy love were ever like to mine-- 
 As sure I think did never man love so-- 
 How many actions most ridiculous 
 Hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy? 
 CORIN  Into a thousand that I have forgotten. 
 SILVIUS  O, thou didst then ne'er love so heartily! 
 If thou remember'st not the slightest folly 
 That ever love did make thee run into, 
 Thou hast not loved: 
 Or if thou hast not sat as I do now, 
 Wearying thy hearer in thy mistress' praise, 
 Thou hast not loved: 
 Or if thou hast not broke from company 
 Abruptly, as my passion now makes me, 
 Thou hast not loved. 
 O Phebe, Phebe, Phebe! 

 Exit  ROSALIND  Alas, poor shepherd! searching of thy wound, 
 I have by hard adventure found mine own. 
 TOUCHSTONE  And I mine. I remember, when I was in love I broke 
 my sword upon a stone and bid him take that for 
 coming a-night to Jane Smile; and I remember the 
 kissing of her batlet and the cow's dugs that her 
 pretty chopt hands had milked; and I remember the 
 wooing of a peascod instead of her, from whom I took 
 two cods and, giving her them again, said with 
 weeping tears 'Wear these for my sake.' We that are 
 true lovers run into strange capers; but as all is 
 mortal in nature, so is all nature in love mortal in folly. 
 ROSALIND  Thou speakest wiser than thou art ware of. 
 TOUCHSTONE  Nay, I shall ne'er be ware of mine own wit till I 
 break my shins against it. 
 ROSALIND  Jove, Jove! this shepherd's passion 
 Is much upon my fashion. 
 TOUCHSTONE  And mine; but it grows something stale with me. 
 CELIA  I pray you, one of you question yond man 
 If he for gold will give us any food: 
 I faint almost to death. 
 TOUCHSTONE  Holla, you clown! 
 ROSALIND  Peace, fool: he's not thy kinsman. 
 CORIN  Who calls? 
 TOUCHSTONE  Your betters, sir. 
 CORIN  Else are they very wretched. 
 ROSALIND  Peace, I say. Good even to you, friend. 
 CORIN  And to you, gentle sir, and to you all. 
 ROSALIND  I prithee, shepherd, if that love or gold 
 Can in this desert place buy entertainment, 
 Bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed: 
 Here's a young maid with travel much oppress'd 
 And faints for succor. 
 CORIN  Fair sir, I pity her 
 And wish, for her sake more than for mine own, 
 My fortunes were more able to relieve her; 
 But I am shepherd to another man 
 And do not shear the fleeces that I graze: 
 My master is of churlish disposition 
 And little recks to find the way to heaven 
 By doing deeds of hospitality: 
 Besides, his cote, his flocks and bounds of feed 
 Are now on sale, and at our sheepcote now, 
 By reason of his absence, there is nothing 
 That you will feed on; but what is, come see. 
 And in my voice most welcome shall you be. 
 ROSALIND  What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture? 
 CORIN  That young swain that you saw here but erewhile, 
 That little cares for buying any thing. 
 ROSALIND  I pray thee, if it stand with honesty, 
 Buy thou the cottage, pasture and the flock, 
 And thou shalt have to pay for it of us. 
 CELIA  And we will mend thy wages. I like this place. 
 And willingly could waste my time in it. 
 CORIN  Assuredly the thing is to be sold: 
 Go with me: if you like upon report 
 The soil, the profit and this kind of life, 
 I will your very faithful feeder be 
 And buy it with your gold right suddenly. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  As You Like It  | Act 2, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 