SCENE VI. Rome. OCTAVIUS CAESAR's house. Antony and Cleopatra  Shakespeare homepage  |  Antony and Cleopatra  | Act 3, Scene 6 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE VI. Rome. OCTAVIUS CAESAR's house. 
 Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, AGRIPPA, and MECAENAS  OCTAVIUS CAESAR  Contemning Rome, he has done all this, and more, 
 In Alexandria: here's the manner of 't: 
 I' the market-place, on a tribunal silver'd, 
 Cleopatra and himself in chairs of gold 
 Were publicly enthroned: at the feet sat 
 Caesarion, whom they call my father's son, 
 And all the unlawful issue that their lust 
 Since then hath made between them. Unto her 
 He gave the stablishment of Egypt; made her 
 Of lower Syria, Cyprus, Lydia, 
 Absolute queen. 
 MECAENAS  This in the public eye? 
 OCTAVIUS CAESAR  I' the common show-place, where they exercise. 
 His sons he there proclaim'd the kings of kings: 
 Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia. 
 He gave to Alexander; to Ptolemy he assign'd 
 Syria, Cilicia, and Phoenicia: she 
 In the habiliments of the goddess Isis 
 That day appear'd; and oft before gave audience, 
 As 'tis reported, so. 
 MECAENAS  Let Rome be thus Inform'd. 
 AGRIPPA  Who, queasy with his insolence 
 Already, will their good thoughts call from him. 
 OCTAVIUS CAESAR  The people know it; and have now received 
 His accusations. 
 AGRIPPA  Who does he accuse? 
 OCTAVIUS CAESAR  Caesar: and that, having in Sicily 
 Sextus Pompeius spoil'd, we had not rated him 
 His part o' the isle: then does he say, he lent me 
 Some shipping unrestored: lastly, he frets 
 That Lepidus of the triumvirate 
 Should be deposed; and, being, that we detain 
 All his revenue. 
 AGRIPPA  Sir, this should be answer'd. 
 OCTAVIUS CAESAR  'Tis done already, and the messenger gone. 
 I have told him, Lepidus was grown too cruel; 
 That he his high authority abused, 
 And did deserve his change: for what I have conquer'd, 
 I grant him part; but then, in his Armenia, 
 And other of his conquer'd kingdoms, I 
 Demand the like. 
 MECAENAS  He'll never yield to that. 
 OCTAVIUS CAESAR  Nor must not then be yielded to in this. 

 Enter OCTAVIA with her train  OCTAVIA  Hail, Caesar, and my lord! hail, most dear Caesar! 
 OCTAVIUS CAESAR  That ever I should call thee castaway! 
 OCTAVIA  You have not call'd me so, nor have you cause. 
 OCTAVIUS CAESAR  Why have you stol'n upon us thus! You come not 
 Like Caesar's sister: the wife of Antony 
 Should have an army for an usher, and 
 The neighs of horse to tell of her approach 
 Long ere she did appear; the trees by the way 
 Should have borne men; and expectation fainted, 
 Longing for what it had not; nay, the dust 
 Should have ascended to the roof of heaven, 
 Raised by your populous troops: but you are come 
 A market-maid to Rome; and have prevented 
 The ostentation of our love, which, left unshown, 
 Is often left unloved; we should have met you 
 By sea and land; supplying every stage 
 With an augmented greeting. 
 OCTAVIA  Good my lord, 
 To come thus was I not constrain'd, but did 
 On my free will. My lord, Mark Antony, 
 Hearing that you prepared for war, acquainted 
 My grieved ear withal; whereon, I begg'd 
 His pardon for return. 
 OCTAVIUS CAESAR  Which soon he granted, 
 Being an obstruct 'tween his lust and him. 
 OCTAVIA  Do not say so, my lord. 
 OCTAVIUS CAESAR  I have eyes upon him, 
 And his affairs come to me on the wind. 
 Where is he now? 
 OCTAVIA  My lord, in Athens. 
 OCTAVIUS CAESAR  No, my most wronged sister; Cleopatra 
 Hath nodded him to her. He hath given his empire 
 Up to a whore; who now are levying 
 The kings o' the earth for war; he hath assembled 
 Bocchus, the king of Libya; Archelaus, 
 Of Cappadocia; Philadelphos, king 
 Of Paphlagonia; the Thracian king, Adallas; 
 King Malchus of Arabia; King of Pont; 
 Herod of Jewry; Mithridates, king 
 Of Comagene; Polemon and Amyntas, 
 The kings of Mede and Lycaonia, 
 With a more larger list of sceptres. 
 OCTAVIA  Ay me, most wretched, 
 That have my heart parted betwixt two friends 
 That do afflict each other! 
 OCTAVIUS CAESAR  Welcome hither: 
 Your letters did withhold our breaking forth; 
 Till we perceived, both how you were wrong led, 
 And we in negligent danger. Cheer your heart; 
 Be you not troubled with the time, which drives 
 O'er your content these strong necessities; 
 But let determined things to destiny 
 Hold unbewail'd their way. Welcome to Rome; 
 Nothing more dear to me. You are abused 
 Beyond the mark of thought: and the high gods, 
 To do you justice, make them ministers 
 Of us and those that love you. Best of comfort; 
 And ever welcome to us. 
 AGRIPPA  Welcome, lady. 
 MECAENAS  Welcome, dear madam. 
 Each heart in Rome does love and pity you: 
 Only the adulterous Antony, most large 
 In his abominations, turns you off; 
 And gives his potent regiment to a trull, 
 That noises it against us. 
 OCTAVIA  Is it so, sir? 
 OCTAVIUS CAESAR  Most certain. Sister, welcome: pray you, 
 Be ever known to patience: my dear'st sister! 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Antony and Cleopatra  | Act 3, Scene 6 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 