SCENE I. A plain in Syria. Antony and Cleopatra  Shakespeare homepage  |  Antony and Cleopatra  | Act 3, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. A plain in Syria. 
 Enter VENTIDIUS as it were in triumph, with SILIUS,  and other Romans, Officers, and Soldiers; the dead body of PACORUS borne before him  VENTIDIUS  Now, darting Parthia, art thou struck; and now 
 Pleased fortune does of Marcus Crassus' death 
 Make me revenger. Bear the king's son's body 
 Before our army. Thy Pacorus, Orodes, 
 Pays this for Marcus Crassus. 
 SILIUS  Noble Ventidius, 
 Whilst yet with Parthian blood thy sword is warm, 
 The fugitive Parthians follow; spur through Media, 
 Mesopotamia, and the shelters whither 
 The routed fly: so thy grand captain Antony 
 Shall set thee on triumphant chariots and 
 Put garlands on thy head. 
 VENTIDIUS  O Silius, Silius, 
 I have done enough; a lower place, note well, 
 May make too great an act: for learn this, Silius; 
 Better to leave undone, than by our deed 
 Acquire too high a fame when him we serve's away. 
 Caesar and Antony have ever won 
 More in their officer than person: Sossius, 
 One of my place in Syria, his lieutenant, 
 For quick accumulation of renown, 
 Which he achieved by the minute, lost his favour. 
 Who does i' the wars more than his captain can 
 Becomes his captain's captain: and ambition, 
 The soldier's virtue, rather makes choice of loss, 
 Than gain which darkens him. 
 I could do more to do Antonius good, 
 But 'twould offend him; and in his offence 
 Should my performance perish. 
 SILIUS  Thou hast, Ventidius, 
 that 
 Without the which a soldier, and his sword, 
 Grants scarce distinction. Thou wilt write to Antony! 
 VENTIDIUS  I'll humbly signify what in his name, 
 That magical word of war, we have effected; 
 How, with his banners and his well-paid ranks, 
 The ne'er-yet-beaten horse of Parthia 
 We have jaded out o' the field. 
 SILIUS  Where is he now? 
 VENTIDIUS  He purposeth to Athens: whither, with what haste 
 The weight we must convey with's will permit, 
 We shall appear before him. On there; pass along! 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Antony and Cleopatra  | Act 3, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 