SCENE IX. OCTAVIUS CAESAR's camp. Antony and Cleopatra  Shakespeare homepage  |  Antony and Cleopatra  | Act 4, Scene 9 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE IX. OCTAVIUS CAESAR's camp. 
 Sentinels at their post  First Soldier  If we be not relieved within this hour, 
 We must return to the court of guard: the night 
 Is shiny; and they say we shall embattle 
 By the second hour i' the morn. 
 Second Soldier  This last day was 
 A shrewd one to's. 

 Enter DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS  DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS  O, bear me witness, night,-- 
 Third Soldier  What man is this? 
 Second Soldier  Stand close, and list him. 
 DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS  Be witness to me, O thou blessed moon, 
 When men revolted shall upon record 
 Bear hateful memory, poor Enobarbus did 
 Before thy face repent! 
 First Soldier  Enobarbus! 
 Third Soldier  Peace! 
 Hark further. 
 DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS  O sovereign mistress of true melancholy, 
 The poisonous damp of night disponge upon me, 
 That life, a very rebel to my will, 
 May hang no longer on me: throw my heart 
 Against the flint and hardness of my fault: 
 Which, being dried with grief, will break to powder, 
 And finish all foul thoughts. O Antony, 
 Nobler than my revolt is infamous, 
 Forgive me in thine own particular; 
 But let the world rank me in register 
 A master-leaver and a fugitive: 
 O Antony! O Antony! 

 Dies  Second Soldier  Let's speak To him. 
 First Soldier  Let's hear him, for the things he speaks 
 May concern Caesar. 
 Third Soldier  Let's do so. But he sleeps. 
 First Soldier  Swoons rather; for so bad a prayer as his 
 Was never yet for sleep. 
 Second Soldier  Go we to him. 
 Third Soldier  Awake, sir, awake; speak to us. 
 Second Soldier  Hear you, sir? 
 First Soldier  The hand of death hath raught him. 

 Drums afar off  Hark! the drums 
 Demurely wake the sleepers. Let us bear him 
 To the court of guard; he is of note: our hour 
 Is fully out. 
 Third Soldier  Come on, then; 
 He may recover yet. 

 Exeunt with the body  Shakespeare homepage  |  Antony and Cleopatra  | Act 4, Scene 9 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 