SCENE III. Rome. A room in Marcius' house. The Tragedy of Coriolanus  Shakespeare homepage  |  Coriolanus  | Act 1, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. Rome. A room in Marcius' house. 
 Enter VOLUMNIA and VIRGILIA	they set them down on two low stools, and sew  VOLUMNIA  I pray you, daughter, sing; or express yourself in a 
 more comfortable sort: if my son were my husband, I 
 should freelier rejoice in that absence wherein he 
 won honour than in the embracements of his bed where 
 he would show most love. When yet he was but 
 tender-bodied and the only son of my womb, when 
 youth with comeliness plucked all gaze his way, when 
 for a day of kings' entreaties a mother should not 
 sell him an hour from her beholding, I, considering 
 how honour would become such a person. that it was 
 no better than picture-like to hang by the wall, if 
 renown made it not stir, was pleased to let him seek 
 danger where he was like to find fame. To a cruel 
 war I sent him; from whence he returned, his brows 
 bound with oak. I tell thee, daughter, I sprang not 
 more in joy at first hearing he was a man-child 
 than now in first seeing he had proved himself a 
 man. 
 VIRGILIA  But had he died in the business, madam; how then? 
 VOLUMNIA  Then his good report should have been my son; I 
 therein would have found issue. Hear me profess 
 sincerely: had I a dozen sons, each in my love 
 alike and none less dear than thine and my good 
 Marcius, I had rather had eleven die nobly for their 
 country than one voluptuously surfeit out of action. 

 Enter a Gentlewoman  Gentlewoman  Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to visit you. 
 VIRGILIA  Beseech you, give me leave to retire myself. 
 VOLUMNIA  Indeed, you shall not. 
 Methinks I hear hither your husband's drum, 
 See him pluck Aufidius down by the hair, 
 As children from a bear, the Volsces shunning him: 
 Methinks I see him stamp thus, and call thus: 
 'Come on, you cowards! you were got in fear, 
 Though you were born in Rome:' his bloody brow 
 With his mail'd hand then wiping, forth he goes, 
 Like to a harvest-man that's task'd to mow 
 Or all or lose his hire. 
 VIRGILIA  His bloody brow! O Jupiter, no blood! 
 VOLUMNIA  Away, you fool! it more becomes a man 
 Than gilt his trophy: the breasts of Hecuba, 
 When she did suckle Hector, look'd not lovelier 
 Than Hector's forehead when it spit forth blood 
 At Grecian sword, contemning. Tell Valeria, 
 We are fit to bid her welcome. 

 Exit Gentlewoman  VIRGILIA  Heavens bless my lord from fell Aufidius! 
 VOLUMNIA  He'll beat Aufidius 'head below his knee 
 And tread upon his neck. 

 Enter VALERIA, with an Usher and Gentlewoman  VALERIA  My ladies both, good day to you. 
 VOLUMNIA  Sweet madam. 
 VIRGILIA  I am glad to see your ladyship. 
 VALERIA  How do you both? you are manifest house-keepers. 
 What are you sewing here? A fine spot, in good 
 faith. How does your little son? 
 VIRGILIA  I thank your ladyship; well, good madam. 
 VOLUMNIA  He had rather see the swords, and hear a drum, than 
 look upon his school-master. 
 VALERIA  O' my word, the father's son: I'll swear,'tis a 
 very pretty boy. O' my troth, I looked upon him o' 
 Wednesday half an hour together: has such a 
 confirmed countenance. I saw him run after a gilded 
 butterfly: and when he caught it, he let it go 
 again; and after it again; and over and over he 
 comes, and again; catched it again; or whether his 
 fall enraged him, or how 'twas, he did so set his 
 teeth and tear it; O, I warrant it, how he mammocked 
 it! 
 VOLUMNIA  One on 's father's moods. 
 VALERIA  Indeed, la, 'tis a noble child. 
 VIRGILIA  A crack, madam. 
 VALERIA  Come, lay aside your stitchery; I must have you play 
 the idle husewife with me this afternoon. 
 VIRGILIA  No, good madam; I will not out of doors. 
 VALERIA  Not out of doors! 
 VOLUMNIA  She shall, she shall. 
 VIRGILIA  Indeed, no, by your patience; I'll not over the 
 threshold till my lord return from the wars. 
 VALERIA  Fie, you confine yourself most unreasonably: come, 
 you must go visit the good lady that lies in. 
 VIRGILIA  I will wish her speedy strength, and visit her with 
 my prayers; but I cannot go thither. 
 VOLUMNIA  Why, I pray you? 
 VIRGILIA  'Tis not to save labour, nor that I want love. 
 VALERIA  You would be another Penelope: yet, they say, all 
 the yarn she spun in Ulysses' absence did but fill 
 Ithaca full of moths. Come; I would your cambric 
 were sensible as your finger, that you might leave 
 pricking it for pity. Come, you shall go with us. 
 VIRGILIA  No, good madam, pardon me; indeed, I will not forth. 
 VALERIA  In truth, la, go with me; and I'll tell you 
 excellent news of your husband. 
 VIRGILIA  O, good madam, there can be none yet. 
 VALERIA  Verily, I do not jest with you; there came news from 
 him last night. 
 VIRGILIA  Indeed, madam? 
 VALERIA  In earnest, it's true; I heard a senator speak it. 
 Thus it is: the Volsces have an army forth; against 
 whom Cominius the general is gone, with one part of 
 our Roman power: your lord and Titus Lartius are set 
 down before their city Corioli; they nothing doubt 
 prevailing and to make it brief wars. This is true, 
 on mine honour; and so, I pray, go with us. 
 VIRGILIA  Give me excuse, good madam; I will obey you in every 
 thing hereafter. 
 VOLUMNIA  Let her alone, lady: as she is now, she will but 
 disease our better mirth. 
 VALERIA  In troth, I think she would. Fare you well, then. 
 Come, good sweet lady. Prithee, Virgilia, turn thy 
 solemness out o' door. and go along with us. 
 VIRGILIA  No, at a word, madam; indeed, I must not. I wish 
 you much mirth. 
 VALERIA  Well, then, farewell. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Coriolanus  | Act 1, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 