SCENE II. The same. The Capitol. The Tragedy of Coriolanus  Shakespeare homepage  |  Coriolanus  | Act 2, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. The same. The Capitol. 
 Enter two Officers, to lay cushions  First Officer  Come, come, they are almost here. How many stand 
 for consulships? 
 Second Officer  Three, they say: but 'tis thought of every one 
 Coriolanus will carry it. 
 First Officer  That's a brave fellow; but he's vengeance proud, and 
 loves not the common people. 
 Second Officer  Faith, there had been many great men that have 
 flattered the people, who ne'er loved them; and there 
 be many that they have loved, they know not 
 wherefore: so that, if they love they know not why, 
 they hate upon no better a ground: therefore, for 
 Coriolanus neither to care whether they love or hate 
 him manifests the true knowledge he has in their 
 disposition; and out of his noble carelessness lets 
 them plainly see't. 
 First Officer  If he did not care whether he had their love or no, 
 he waved indifferently 'twixt doing them neither 
 good nor harm: but he seeks their hate with greater 
 devotion than can render it him; and leaves 
 nothing undone that may fully discover him their 
 opposite. Now, to seem to affect the malice and 
 displeasure of the people is as bad as that which he 
 dislikes, to flatter them for their love. 
 Second Officer  He hath deserved worthily of his country: and his 
 ascent is not by such easy degrees as those who, 
 having been supple and courteous to the people, 
 bonneted, without any further deed to have them at 
 an into their estimation and report: but he hath so 
 planted his honours in their eyes, and his actions 
 in their hearts, that for their tongues to be 
 silent, and not confess so much, were a kind of 
 ingrateful injury; to report otherwise, were a 
 malice, that, giving itself the lie, would pluck 
 reproof and rebuke from every ear that heard it. 
 First Officer  No more of him; he is a worthy man: make way, they 
 are coming. 

 A sennet. Enter, with actors before them, COMINIUS  the consul, MENENIUS, CORIOLANUS, Senators,  SICINIUS and BRUTUS. The Senators take their  places; the Tribunes take their Places by themselves. CORIOLANUS stands  MENENIUS  Having determined of the Volsces and 
 To send for Titus Lartius, it remains, 
 As the main point of this our after-meeting, 
 To gratify his noble service that 
 Hath thus stood for his country: therefore, 
 please you, 
 Most reverend and grave elders, to desire 
 The present consul, and last general 
 In our well-found successes, to report 
 A little of that worthy work perform'd 
 By Caius Marcius Coriolanus, whom 
 We met here both to thank and to remember 
 With honours like himself. 
 First Senator  Speak, good Cominius: 
 Leave nothing out for length, and make us think 
 Rather our state's defective for requital 
 Than we to stretch it out. 

 To the Tribunes  Masters o' the people, 
 We do request your kindest ears, and after, 
 Your loving motion toward the common body, 
 To yield what passes here. 
 SICINIUS  We are convented 
 Upon a pleasing treaty, and have hearts 
 Inclinable to honour and advance 
 The theme of our assembly. 
 BRUTUS  Which the rather 
 We shall be blest to do, if he remember 
 A kinder value of the people than 
 He hath hereto prized them at. 
 MENENIUS  That's off, that's off; 
 I would you rather had been silent. Please you 
 To hear Cominius speak? 
 BRUTUS  Most willingly; 
 But yet my caution was more pertinent 
 Than the rebuke you give it. 
 MENENIUS  He loves your people 
 But tie him not to be their bedfellow. 
 Worthy Cominius, speak. 

 CORIOLANUS offers to go away  Nay, keep your place. 
 First Senator  Sit, Coriolanus; never shame to hear 
 What you have nobly done. 
 CORIOLANUS  Your horror's pardon: 
 I had rather have my wounds to heal again 
 Than hear say how I got them. 
 BRUTUS  Sir, I hope 
 My words disbench'd you not. 
 CORIOLANUS  No, sir: yet oft, 
 When blows have made me stay, I fled from words. 
 You soothed not, therefore hurt not: but 
 your people, 
 I love them as they weigh. 
 MENENIUS  Pray now, sit down. 
 CORIOLANUS  I had rather have one scratch my head i' the sun 
 When the alarum were struck than idly sit 
 To hear my nothings monster'd. 

 Exit  MENENIUS  Masters of the people, 
 Your multiplying spawn how can he flatter-- 
 That's thousand to one good one--when you now see 
 He had rather venture all his limbs for honour 
 Than one on's ears to hear it? Proceed, Cominius. 
 COMINIUS  I shall lack voice: the deeds of Coriolanus 
 Should not be utter'd feebly. It is held 
 That valour is the chiefest virtue, and 
 Most dignifies the haver: if it be, 
 The man I speak of cannot in the world 
 Be singly counterpoised. At sixteen years, 
 When Tarquin made a head for Rome, he fought 
 Beyond the mark of others: our then dictator, 
 Whom with all praise I point at, saw him fight, 
 When with his Amazonian chin he drove 
 The bristled lips before him: be bestrid 
 An o'er-press'd Roman and i' the consul's view 
 Slew three opposers: Tarquin's self he met, 
 And struck him on his knee: in that day's feats, 
 When he might act the woman in the scene, 
 He proved best man i' the field, and for his meed 
 Was brow-bound with the oak. His pupil age 
 Man-enter'd thus, he waxed like a sea, 
 And in the brunt of seventeen battles since 
 He lurch'd all swords of the garland. For this last, 
 Before and in Corioli, let me say, 
 I cannot speak him home: he stopp'd the fliers; 
 And by his rare example made the coward 
 Turn terror into sport: as weeds before 
 A vessel under sail, so men obey'd 
 And fell below his stem: his sword, death's stamp, 
 Where it did mark, it took; from face to foot 
 He was a thing of blood, whose every motion 
 Was timed with dying cries: alone he enter'd 
 The mortal gate of the city, which he painted 
 With shunless destiny; aidless came off, 
 And with a sudden reinforcement struck 
 Corioli like a planet: now all's his: 
 When, by and by, the din of war gan pierce 
 His ready sense; then straight his doubled spirit 
 Re-quicken'd what in flesh was fatigate, 
 And to the battle came he; where he did 
 Run reeking o'er the lives of men, as if 
 'Twere a perpetual spoil: and till we call'd 
 Both field and city ours, he never stood 
 To ease his breast with panting. 
 MENENIUS  Worthy man! 
 First Senator  He cannot but with measure fit the honours 
 Which we devise him. 
 COMINIUS  Our spoils he kick'd at, 
 And look'd upon things precious as they were 
 The common muck of the world: he covets less 
 Than misery itself would give; rewards 
 His deeds with doing them, and is content 
 To spend the time to end it. 
 MENENIUS  He's right noble: 
 Let him be call'd for. 
 First Senator  Call Coriolanus. 
 Officer  He doth appear. 

 Re-enter CORIOLANUS  MENENIUS  The senate, Coriolanus, are well pleased 
 To make thee consul. 
 CORIOLANUS  I do owe them still 
 My life and services. 
 MENENIUS  It then remains 
 That you do speak to the people. 
 CORIOLANUS  I do beseech you, 
 Let me o'erleap that custom, for I cannot 
 Put on the gown, stand naked and entreat them, 
 For my wounds' sake, to give their suffrage: please you 
 That I may pass this doing. 
 SICINIUS  Sir, the people 
 Must have their voices; neither will they bate 
 One jot of ceremony. 
 MENENIUS  Put them not to't: 
 Pray you, go fit you to the custom and 
 Take to you, as your predecessors have, 
 Your honour with your form. 
 CORIOLANUS  It is apart 
 That I shall blush in acting, and might well 
 Be taken from the people. 
 BRUTUS  Mark you that? 
 CORIOLANUS  To brag unto them, thus I did, and thus; 
 Show them the unaching scars which I should hide, 
 As if I had received them for the hire 
 Of their breath only! 
 MENENIUS  Do not stand upon't. 
 We recommend to you, tribunes of the people, 
 Our purpose to them: and to our noble consul 
 Wish we all joy and honour. 
 Senators  To Coriolanus come all joy and honour! 

 Flourish of cornets. Exeunt all but SICINIUS and BRUTUS  BRUTUS  You see how he intends to use the people. 
 SICINIUS  May they perceive's intent! He will require them, 
 As if he did contemn what he requested 
 Should be in them to give. 
 BRUTUS  Come, we'll inform them 
 Of our proceedings here: on the marketplace, 
 I know, they do attend us. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Coriolanus  | Act 2, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 