SCENE III. The tent of Coriolanus. The Tragedy of Coriolanus  Shakespeare homepage  |  Coriolanus  | Act 5, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. The tent of Coriolanus. 
 Enter CORIOLANUS, AUFIDIUS, and others  CORIOLANUS  We will before the walls of Rome tomorrow 
 Set down our host. My partner in this action, 
 You must report to the Volscian lords, how plainly 
 I have borne this business. 
 AUFIDIUS  Only their ends 
 You have respected; stopp'd your ears against 
 The general suit of Rome; never admitted 
 A private whisper, no, not with such friends 
 That thought them sure of you. 
 CORIOLANUS  This last old man, 
 Whom with a crack'd heart I have sent to Rome, 
 Loved me above the measure of a father; 
 Nay, godded me, indeed. Their latest refuge 
 Was to send him; for whose old love I have, 
 Though I show'd sourly to him, once more offer'd 
 The first conditions, which they did refuse 
 And cannot now accept; to grace him only 
 That thought he could do more, a very little 
 I have yielded to: fresh embassies and suits, 
 Nor from the state nor private friends, hereafter 
 Will I lend ear to. Ha! what shout is this? 

 Shout within  Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow 
 In the same time 'tis made? I will not. 

 Enter in mourning habits, VIRGILIA, VOLUMNIA, leading young MARCIUS, VALERIA, and Attendants  My wife comes foremost; then the honour'd mould 
 Wherein this trunk was framed, and in her hand 
 The grandchild to her blood. But, out, affection! 
 All bond and privilege of nature, break! 
 Let it be virtuous to be obstinate. 
 What is that curt'sy worth? or those doves' eyes, 
 Which can make gods forsworn? I melt, and am not 
 Of stronger earth than others. My mother bows; 
 As if Olympus to a molehill should 
 In supplication nod: and my young boy 
 Hath an aspect of intercession, which 
 Great nature cries 'Deny not.' let the Volsces 
 Plough Rome and harrow Italy: I'll never 
 Be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand, 
 As if a man were author of himself 
 And knew no other kin. 
 VIRGILIA  My lord and husband! 
 CORIOLANUS  These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome. 
 VIRGILIA  The sorrow that delivers us thus changed 
 Makes you think so. 
 CORIOLANUS  Like a dull actor now, 
 I have forgot my part, and I am out, 
 Even to a full disgrace. Best of my flesh, 
 Forgive my tyranny; but do not say 
 For that 'Forgive our Romans.' O, a kiss 
 Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge! 
 Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss 
 I carried from thee, dear; and my true lip 
 Hath virgin'd it e'er since. You gods! I prate, 
 And the most noble mother of the world 
 Leave unsaluted: sink, my knee, i' the earth; 

 Kneels  Of thy deep duty more impression show 
 Than that of common sons. 
 VOLUMNIA  O, stand up blest! 
 Whilst, with no softer cushion than the flint, 
 I kneel before thee; and unproperly 
 Show duty, as mistaken all this while 
 Between the child and parent. 

 Kneels  CORIOLANUS  What is this? 
 Your knees to me? to your corrected son? 
 Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach 
 Fillip the stars; then let the mutinous winds 
 Strike the proud cedars 'gainst the fiery sun; 
 Murdering impossibility, to make 
 What cannot be, slight work. 
 VOLUMNIA  Thou art my warrior; 
 I holp to frame thee. Do you know this lady? 
 CORIOLANUS  The noble sister of Publicola, 
 The moon of Rome, chaste as the icicle 
 That's curdied by the frost from purest snow 
 And hangs on Dian's temple: dear Valeria! 
 VOLUMNIA  This is a poor epitome of yours, 
 Which by the interpretation of full time 
 May show like all yourself. 
 CORIOLANUS  The god of soldiers, 
 With the consent of supreme Jove, inform 
 Thy thoughts with nobleness; that thou mayst prove 
 To shame unvulnerable, and stick i' the wars 
 Like a great sea-mark, standing every flaw, 
 And saving those that eye thee! 
 VOLUMNIA  Your knee, sirrah. 
 CORIOLANUS  That's my brave boy! 
 VOLUMNIA  Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself, 
 Are suitors to you. 
 CORIOLANUS  I beseech you, peace: 
 Or, if you'ld ask, remember this before: 
 The thing I have forsworn to grant may never 
 Be held by you denials. Do not bid me 
 Dismiss my soldiers, or capitulate 
 Again with Rome's mechanics: tell me not 
 Wherein I seem unnatural: desire not 
 To ally my rages and revenges with 
 Your colder reasons. 
 VOLUMNIA  O, no more, no more! 
 You have said you will not grant us any thing; 
 For we have nothing else to ask, but that 
 Which you deny already: yet we will ask; 
 That, if you fail in our request, the blame 
 May hang upon your hardness: therefore hear us. 
 CORIOLANUS  Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark; for we'll 
 Hear nought from Rome in private. Your request? 
 VOLUMNIA  Should we be silent and not speak, our raiment 
 And state of bodies would bewray what life 
 We have led since thy exile. Think with thyself 
 How more unfortunate than all living women 
 Are we come hither: since that thy sight, 
 which should 
 Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance 
 with comforts, 
 Constrains them weep and shake with fear and sorrow; 
 Making the mother, wife and child to see 
 The son, the husband and the father tearing 
 His country's bowels out. And to poor we 
 Thine enmity's most capital: thou barr'st us 
 Our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort 
 That all but we enjoy; for how can we, 
 Alas, how can we for our country pray. 
 Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory, 
 Whereto we are bound? alack, or we must lose 
 The country, our dear nurse, or else thy person, 
 Our comfort in the country. We must find 
 An evident calamity, though we had 
 Our wish, which side should win: for either thou 
 Must, as a foreign recreant, be led 
 With manacles thorough our streets, or else 
 triumphantly tread on thy country's ruin, 
 And bear the palm for having bravely shed 
 Thy wife and children's blood. For myself, son, 
 I purpose not to wait on fortune till 
 These wars determine: if I cannot persuade thee 
 Rather to show a noble grace to both parts 
 Than seek the end of one, thou shalt no sooner 
 March to assault thy country than to tread-- 
 Trust to't, thou shalt not--on thy mother's womb, 
 That brought thee to this world. 
 VIRGILIA  Ay, and mine, 
 That brought you forth this boy, to keep your name 
 Living to time. 
 Young MARCIUS  A' shall not tread on me; 
 I'll run away till I am bigger, but then I'll fight. 
 CORIOLANUS  Not of a woman's tenderness to be, 
 Requires nor child nor woman's face to see. 
 I have sat too long. 

 Rising  VOLUMNIA  Nay, go not from us thus. 
 If it were so that our request did tend 
 To save the Romans, thereby to destroy 
 The Volsces whom you serve, you might condemn us, 
 As poisonous of your honour: no; our suit 
 Is that you reconcile them: while the Volsces 
 May say 'This mercy we have show'd;' the Romans, 
 'This we received;' and each in either side 
 Give the all-hail to thee and cry 'Be blest 
 For making up this peace!' Thou know'st, great son, 
 The end of war's uncertain, but this certain, 
 That, if thou conquer Rome, the benefit 
 Which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name, 
 Whose repetition will be dogg'd with curses; 
 Whose chronicle thus writ: 'The man was noble, 
 But with his last attempt he wiped it out; 
 Destroy'd his country, and his name remains 
 To the ensuing age abhorr'd.' Speak to me, son: 
 Thou hast affected the fine strains of honour, 
 To imitate the graces of the gods; 
 To tear with thunder the wide cheeks o' the air, 
 And yet to charge thy sulphur with a bolt 
 That should but rive an oak. Why dost not speak? 
 Think'st thou it honourable for a noble man 
 Still to remember wrongs? Daughter, speak you: 
 He cares not for your weeping. Speak thou, boy: 
 Perhaps thy childishness will move him more 
 Than can our reasons. There's no man in the world 
 More bound to 's mother; yet here he lets me prate 
 Like one i' the stocks. Thou hast never in thy life 
 Show'd thy dear mother any courtesy, 
 When she, poor hen, fond of no second brood, 
 Has cluck'd thee to the wars and safely home, 
 Loaden with honour. Say my request's unjust, 
 And spurn me back: but if it be not so, 
 Thou art not honest; and the gods will plague thee, 
 That thou restrain'st from me the duty which 
 To a mother's part belongs. He turns away: 
 Down, ladies; let us shame him with our knees. 
 To his surname Coriolanus 'longs more pride 
 Than pity to our prayers. Down: an end; 
 This is the last: so we will home to Rome, 
 And die among our neighbours. Nay, behold 's: 
 This boy, that cannot tell what he would have 
 But kneels and holds up bands for fellowship, 
 Does reason our petition with more strength 
 Than thou hast to deny 't. Come, let us go: 
 This fellow had a Volscian to his mother; 
 His wife is in Corioli and his child 
 Like him by chance. Yet give us our dispatch: 
 I am hush'd until our city be a-fire, 
 And then I'll speak a little. 

 He holds her by the hand, silent  CORIOLANUS  O mother, mother! 
 What have you done? Behold, the heavens do ope, 
 The gods look down, and this unnatural scene 
 They laugh at. O my mother, mother! O! 
 You have won a happy victory to Rome; 
 But, for your son,--believe it, O, believe it, 
 Most dangerously you have with him prevail'd, 
 If not most mortal to him. But, let it come. 
 Aufidius, though I cannot make true wars, 
 I'll frame convenient peace. Now, good Aufidius, 
 Were you in my stead, would you have heard 
 A mother less? or granted less, Aufidius? 
 AUFIDIUS  I was moved withal. 
 CORIOLANUS  I dare be sworn you were: 
 And, sir, it is no little thing to make 
 Mine eyes to sweat compassion. But, good sir, 
 What peace you'll make, advise me: for my part, 
 I'll not to Rome, I'll back with you; and pray you, 
 Stand to me in this cause. O mother! wife! 
 AUFIDIUS  [Aside]  I am glad thou hast set thy mercy and 
 thy honour 
 At difference in thee: out of that I'll work 
 Myself a former fortune. 

 The Ladies make signs to CORIOLANUS  CORIOLANUS  Ay, by and by; 

 To VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA,  & c  But we will drink together; and you shall bear 
 A better witness back than words, which we, 
 On like conditions, will have counter-seal'd. 
 Come, enter with us. Ladies, you deserve 
 To have a temple built you: all the swords 
 In Italy, and her confederate arms, 
 Could not have made this peace. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Coriolanus  | Act 5, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 