SCENE IV. Rome. Philario's house. Cymbeline  Shakespeare homepage  |  Cymbeline  | Act 1, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE IV. Rome. Philario's house. 
 Enter PHILARIO, IACHIMO, a Frenchman, a Dutchman, and a Spaniard  IACHIMO  Believe it, sir, I have seen him in Britain: he was 
 then of a crescent note, expected to prove so worthy 
 as since he hath been allowed the name of; but I 
 could then have looked on him without the help of 
 admiration, though the catalogue of his endowments 
 had been tabled by his side and I to peruse him by items. 
 PHILARIO  You speak of him when he was less furnished than now 
 he is with that which makes him both without and within. 
 Frenchman  I have seen him in France: we had very many there 
 could behold the sun with as firm eyes as he. 
 IACHIMO  This matter of marrying his king's daughter, wherein 
 he must be weighed rather by her value than his own, 
 words him, I doubt not, a great deal from the matter. 
 Frenchman  And then his banishment. 
 IACHIMO  Ay, and the approbation of those that weep this 
 lamentable divorce under her colours are wonderfully 
 to extend him; be it but to fortify her judgment, 
 which else an easy battery might lay flat, for 
 taking a beggar without less quality. But how comes 
 it he is to sojourn with you? How creeps 
 acquaintance? 
 PHILARIO  His father and I were soldiers together; to whom I 
 have been often bound for no less than my life. 
 Here comes the Briton: let him be so entertained 
 amongst you as suits, with gentlemen of your 
 knowing, to a stranger of his quality. 

 Enter POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  I beseech you all, be better known to this 
 gentleman; whom I commend to you as a noble friend 
 of mine: how worthy he is I will leave to appear 
 hereafter, rather than story him in his own hearing. 
 Frenchman  Sir, we have known together in Orleans. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  Since when I have been debtor to you for courtesies, 
 which I will be ever to pay and yet pay still. 
 Frenchman  Sir, you o'er-rate my poor kindness: I was glad I 
 did atone my countryman and you; it had been pity 
 you should have been put together with so mortal a 
 purpose as then each bore, upon importance of so 
 slight and trivial a nature. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  By your pardon, sir, I was then a young traveller; 
 rather shunned to go even with what I heard than in 
 my every action to be guided by others' experiences: 
 but upon my mended judgment--if I offend not to say 
 it is mended--my quarrel was not altogether slight. 
 Frenchman  'Faith, yes, to be put to the arbitrement of swords, 
 and by such two that would by all likelihood have 
 confounded one the other, or have fallen both. 
 IACHIMO  Can we, with manners, ask what was the difference? 
 Frenchman  Safely, I think: 'twas a contention in public, 
 which may, without contradiction, suffer the report. 
 It was much like an argument that fell out last 
 night, where each of us fell in praise of our 
 country mistresses; this gentleman at that time 
 vouching--and upon warrant of bloody 
 affirmation--his to be more fair, virtuous, wise, 
 chaste, constant-qualified and less attemptable 
 than any the rarest of our ladies in France. 
 IACHIMO  That lady is not now living, or this gentleman's 
 opinion by this worn out. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  She holds her virtue still and I my mind. 
 IACHIMO  You must not so far prefer her 'fore ours of Italy. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  Being so far provoked as I was in France, I would 
 abate her nothing, though I profess myself her 
 adorer, not her friend. 
 IACHIMO  As fair and as good--a kind of hand-in-hand 
 comparison--had been something too fair and too good 
 for any lady in Britain. If she went before others 
 I have seen, as that diamond of yours outlustres 
 many I have beheld. I could not but believe she 
 excelled many: but I have not seen the most 
 precious diamond that is, nor you the lady. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  I praised her as I rated her: so do I my stone. 
 IACHIMO  What do you esteem it at? 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  More than the world enjoys. 
 IACHIMO  Either your unparagoned mistress is dead, or she's 
 outprized by a trifle. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  You are mistaken: the one may be sold, or given, if 
 there were wealth enough for the purchase, or merit 
 for the gift: the other is not a thing for sale, 
 and only the gift of the gods. 
 IACHIMO  Which the gods have given you? 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  Which, by their graces, I will keep. 
 IACHIMO  You may wear her in title yours: but, you know, 
 strange fowl light upon neighbouring ponds. Your 
 ring may be stolen too: so your brace of unprizable 
 estimations; the one is but frail and the other 
 casual; a cunning thief, or a that way accomplished 
 courtier, would hazard the winning both of first and last. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  Your Italy contains none so accomplished a courtier 
 to convince the honour of my mistress, if, in the 
 holding or loss of that, you term her frail. I do 
 nothing doubt you have store of thieves; 
 notwithstanding, I fear not my ring. 
 PHILARIO  Let us leave here, gentlemen. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  Sir, with all my heart. This worthy signior, I 
 thank him, makes no stranger of me; we are familiar at first. 
 IACHIMO  With five times so much conversation, I should get 
 ground of your fair mistress, make her go back, even 
 to the yielding, had I admittance and opportunity to friend. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  No, no. 
 IACHIMO  I dare thereupon pawn the moiety of my estate to 
 your ring; which, in my opinion, o'ervalues it 
 something: but I make my wager rather against your 
 confidence than her reputation: and, to bar your 
 offence herein too, I durst attempt it against any 
 lady in the world. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  You are a great deal abused in too bold a 
 persuasion; and I doubt not you sustain what you're 
 worthy of by your attempt. 
 IACHIMO  What's that? 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  A repulse: though your attempt, as you call it, 
 deserve more; a punishment too. 
 PHILARIO  Gentlemen, enough of this: it came in too suddenly; 
 let it die as it was born, and, I pray you, be 
 better acquainted. 
 IACHIMO  Would I had put my estate and my neighbour's on the 
 approbation of what I have spoke! 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  What lady would you choose to assail? 
 IACHIMO  Yours; whom in constancy you think stands so safe. 
 I will lay you ten thousand ducats to your ring, 
 that, commend me to the court where your lady is, 
 with no more advantage than the opportunity of a 
 second conference, and I will bring from thence 
 that honour of hers which you imagine so reserved. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  I will wage against your gold, gold to it: my ring 
 I hold dear as my finger; 'tis part of it. 
 IACHIMO  You are afraid, and therein the wiser. If you buy 
 ladies' flesh at a million a dram, you cannot 
 preserve it from tainting: but I see you have some 
 religion in you, that you fear. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  This is but a custom in your tongue; you bear a 
 graver purpose, I hope. 
 IACHIMO  I am the master of my speeches, and would undergo 
 what's spoken, I swear. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  Will you? I shall but lend my diamond till your 
 return: let there be covenants drawn between's: my 
 mistress exceeds in goodness the hugeness of your 
 unworthy thinking: I dare you to this match: here's my ring. 
 PHILARIO  I will have it no lay. 
 IACHIMO  By the gods, it is one. If I bring you no 
 sufficient testimony that I have enjoyed the dearest 
 bodily part of your mistress, my ten thousand ducats 
 are yours; so is your diamond too: if I come off, 
 and leave her in such honour as you have trust in, 
 she your jewel, this your jewel, and my gold are 
 yours: provided I have your commendation for my more 
 free entertainment. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  I embrace these conditions; let us have articles 
 betwixt us. Only, thus far you shall answer: if 
 you make your voyage upon her and give me directly 
 to understand you have prevailed, I am no further 
 your enemy; she is not worth our debate: if she 
 remain unseduced, you not making it appear 
 otherwise, for your ill opinion and the assault you 
 have made to her chastity you shall answer me with 
 your sword. 
 IACHIMO  Your hand; a covenant: we will have these things set 
 down by lawful counsel, and straight away for 
 Britain, lest the bargain should catch cold and 
 starve: I will fetch my gold and have our two 
 wagers recorded. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  Agreed. 

 Exeunt POSTHUMUS LEONATUS and IACHIMO  Frenchman  Will this hold, think you? 
 PHILARIO  Signior Iachimo will not from it. 
 Pray, let us follow 'em. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Cymbeline  | Act 1, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 