SCENE V. Another room in Philario's house. Cymbeline  Shakespeare homepage  |  Cymbeline  | Act 2, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE V. Another room in Philario's house. 
 Enter POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  Is there no way for men to be but women 
 Must be half-workers? We are all bastards; 
 And that most venerable man which I 
 Did call my father, was I know not where 
 When I was stamp'd; some coiner with his tools 
 Made me a counterfeit: yet my mother seem'd 
 The Dian of that time so doth my wife 
 The nonpareil of this. O, vengeance, vengeance! 
 Me of my lawful pleasure she restrain'd 
 And pray'd me oft forbearance; did it with 
 A pudency so rosy the sweet view on't 
 Might well have warm'd old Saturn; that I thought her 
 As chaste as unsunn'd snow. O, all the devils! 
 This yellow Iachimo, in an hour,--wast not?-- 
 Or less,--at first?--perchance he spoke not, but, 
 Like a full-acorn'd boar, a German one, 
 Cried 'O!' and mounted; found no opposition 
 But what he look'd for should oppose and she 
 Should from encounter guard. Could I find out 
 The woman's part in me! For there's no motion 
 That tends to vice in man, but I affirm 
 It is the woman's part: be it lying, note it, 
 The woman's; flattering, hers; deceiving, hers; 
 Lust and rank thoughts, hers, hers; revenges, hers; 
 Ambitions, covetings, change of prides, disdain, 
 Nice longing, slanders, mutability, 
 All faults that may be named, nay, that hell knows, 
 Why, hers, in part or all; but rather, all; 
 For even to vice 
 They are not constant but are changing still 
 One vice, but of a minute old, for one 
 Not half so old as that. I'll write against them, 
 Detest them, curse them: yet 'tis greater skill 
 In a true hate, to pray they have their will: 
 The very devils cannot plague them better. 

 Exit  Shakespeare homepage  |  Cymbeline  | Act 2, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 