SCENE II. Kimbolton. The Life of King Henry the Eighth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VIII  | Act 4, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. Kimbolton. 
 Enter KATHARINE, Dowager, sick; led between GRIFFITH, her gentleman usher, and PATIENCE, her woman  GRIFFITH  How does your grace? 
 KATHARINE  O Griffith, sick to death! 
 My legs, like loaden branches, bow to the earth, 
 Willing to leave their burthen. Reach a chair: 
 So; now, methinks, I feel a little ease. 
 Didst thou not tell me, Griffith, as thou led'st me, 
 That the great child of honour, Cardinal Wolsey, Was dead? 
 GRIFFITH  Yes, madam; but I think your grace, 
 Out of the pain you suffer'd, gave no ear to't. 
 KATHARINE  Prithee, good Griffith, tell me how he died: 
 If well, he stepp'd before me, happily 
 For my example. 
 GRIFFITH  Well, the voice goes, madam: 
 For after the stout Earl Northumberland 
 Arrested him at York, and brought him forward, 
 As a man sorely tainted, to his answer, 
 He fell sick suddenly, and grew so ill 
 He could not sit his mule. 
 KATHARINE  Alas, poor man! 
 GRIFFITH  At last, with easy roads, he came to Leicester, 
 Lodged in the abbey; where the reverend abbot, 
 With all his covent, honourably received him; 
 To whom he gave these words, 'O, father abbot, 
 An old man, broken with the storms of state, 
 Is come to lay his weary bones among ye; 
 Give him a little earth for charity!' 
 So went to bed; where eagerly his sickness 
 Pursued him still: and, three nights after this, 
 About the hour of eight, which he himself 
 Foretold should be his last, full of repentance, 
 Continual meditations, tears, and sorrows, 
 He gave his honours to the world again, 
 His blessed part to heaven, and slept in peace. 
 KATHARINE  So may he rest; his faults lie gently on him! 
 Yet thus far, Griffith, give me leave to speak him, 
 And yet with charity. He was a man 
 Of an unbounded stomach, ever ranking 
 Himself with princes; one that, by suggestion, 
 Tied all the kingdom: simony was fair-play; 
 His own opinion was his law: i' the presence 
 He would say untruths; and be ever double 
 Both in his words and meaning: he was never, 
 But where he meant to ruin, pitiful: 
 His promises were, as he then was, mighty; 
 But his performance, as he is now, nothing: 
 Of his own body he was ill, and gave 
 The clergy in example. 
 GRIFFITH  Noble madam, 
 Men's evil manners live in brass; their virtues 
 We write in water. May it please your highness 
 To hear me speak his good now? 
 KATHARINE  Yes, good Griffith; 
 I were malicious else. 
 GRIFFITH  This cardinal, 
 Though from an humble stock, undoubtedly 
 Was fashion'd to much honour from his cradle. 
 He was a scholar, and a ripe and good one; 
 Exceeding wise, fair-spoken, and persuading: 
 Lofty and sour to them that loved him not; 
 But to those men that sought him sweet as summer. 
 And though he were unsatisfied in getting, 
 Which was a sin, yet in bestowing, madam, 
 He was most princely: ever witness for him 
 Those twins Of learning that he raised in you, 
 Ipswich and Oxford! one of which fell with him, 
 Unwilling to outlive the good that did it; 
 The other, though unfinish'd, yet so famous, 
 So excellent in art, and still so rising, 
 That Christendom shall ever speak his virtue. 
 His overthrow heap'd happiness upon him; 
 For then, and not till then, he felt himself, 
 And found the blessedness of being little: 
 And, to add greater honours to his age 
 Than man could give him, he died fearing God. 
 KATHARINE  After my death I wish no other herald, 
 No other speaker of my living actions, 
 To keep mine honour from corruption, 
 But such an honest chronicler as Griffith. 
 Whom I most hated living, thou hast made me, 
 With thy religious truth and modesty, 
 Now in his ashes honour: peace be with him! 
 Patience, be near me still; and set me lower: 
 I have not long to trouble thee. Good Griffith, 
 Cause the musicians play me that sad note 
 I named my knell, whilst I sit meditating 
 On that celestial harmony I go to. 

 Sad and solemn music  GRIFFITH  She is asleep: good wench, let's sit down quiet, 
 For fear we wake her: softly, gentle Patience. 

 The vision. Enter, solemnly tripping one after  another, six personages, clad in white robes,  wearing on their heads garlands of bays, and golden  vizards on their faces; branches of bays or palm in  their hands. They first congee unto her, then  dance; and, at certain changes, the first two hold  a spare garland over her head; at which the other  four make reverent curtsies; then the two that held  the garland deliver the same to the other next two,  who observe the same order in their changes, and  holding the garland over her head: which done,  they deliver the same garland to the last two, who  likewise observe the same order: at which, as it  were by inspiration, she makes in her sleep signs  of rejoicing, and holdeth up her hands to heaven:  and so in their dancing vanish, carrying the garland with them. The music continues  KATHARINE  Spirits of peace, where are ye? are ye all gone, 
 And leave me here in wretchedness behind ye? 
 GRIFFITH  Madam, we are here. 
 KATHARINE  It is not you I call for: 
 Saw ye none enter since I slept? 
 GRIFFITH  None, madam. 
 KATHARINE  No? Saw you not, even now, a blessed troop 
 Invite me to a banquet; whose bright faces 
 Cast thousand beams upon me, like the sun? 
 They promised me eternal happiness; 
 And brought me garlands, Griffith, which I feel 
 I am not worthy yet to wear: I shall, assuredly. 
 GRIFFITH  I am most joyful, madam, such good dreams 
 Possess your fancy. 
 KATHARINE  Bid the music leave, 
 They are harsh and heavy to me. 

 Music ceases  PATIENCE  Do you note 
 How much her grace is alter'd on the sudden? 
 How long her face is drawn? how pale she looks, 
 And of an earthy cold? Mark her eyes! 
 GRIFFITH  She is going, wench: pray, pray. 
 PATIENCE  Heaven comfort her! 

 Enter a Messenger  Messenger  An't like your grace,-- 
 KATHARINE  You are a saucy fellow: 
 Deserve we no more reverence? 
 GRIFFITH  You are to blame, 
 Knowing she will not lose her wonted greatness, 
 To use so rude behavior; go to, kneel. 
 Messenger  I humbly do entreat your highness' pardon; 
 My haste made me unmannerly. There is staying 
 A gentleman, sent from the king, to see you. 
 KATHARINE  Admit him entrance, Griffith: but this fellow 
 Let me ne'er see again. 

 Exeunt GRIFFITH and Messenger 
 Re-enter GRIFFITH, with CAPUCIUS  If my sight fail not, 
 You should be lord ambassador from the emperor, 
 My royal nephew, and your name Capucius. 
 CAPUCIUS  Madam, the same; your servant. 
 KATHARINE  O, my lord, 
 The times and titles now are alter'd strangely 
 With me since first you knew me. But, I pray you, 
 What is your pleasure with me? 
 CAPUCIUS  Noble lady, 
 First mine own service to your grace; the next, 
 The king's request that I would visit you; 
 Who grieves much for your weakness, and by me 
 Sends you his princely commendations, 
 And heartily entreats you take good comfort. 
 KATHARINE  O my good lord, that comfort comes too late; 
 'Tis like a pardon after execution: 
 That gentle physic, given in time, had cured me; 
 But now I am past an comforts here, but prayers. 
 How does his highness? 
 CAPUCIUS  Madam, in good health. 
 KATHARINE  So may he ever do! and ever flourish, 
 When I shal l dwell with worms, and my poor name 
 Banish'd the kingdom! Patience, is that letter, 
 I caused you write, yet sent away? 
 PATIENCE  No, madam. 

 Giving it to KATHARINE  KATHARINE  Sir, I most humbly pray you to deliver 
 This to my lord the king. 
 CAPUCIUS  Most willing, madam. 
 KATHARINE  In which I have commended to his goodness 
 The model of our chaste loves, his young daughter; 
 The dews of heaven fall thick in blessings on her! 
 Beseeching him to give her virtuous breeding-- 
 She is young, and of a noble modest nature, 
 I hope she will deserve well,--and a little 
 To love her for her mother's sake, that loved him, 
 Heaven knows how dearly. My next poor petition 
 Is, that his noble grace would have some pity 
 Upon my wretched women, that so long 
 Have follow'd both my fortunes faithfully: 
 Of which there is not one, I dare avow, 
 And now I should not lie, but will deserve 
 For virtue and true beauty of the soul, 
 For honesty and decent carriage, 
 A right good husband, let him be a noble 
 And, sure, those men are happy that shall have 'em. 
 The last is, for my men; they are the poorest, 
 But poverty could never draw 'em from me; 
 That they may have their wages duly paid 'em, 
 And something over to remember me by: 
 If heaven had pleased to have given me longer life 
 And able means, we had not parted thus. 
 These are the whole contents: and, good my lord, 
 By that you love the dearest in this world, 
 As you wish Christian peace to souls departed, 
 Stand these poor people's friend, and urge the king 
 To do me this last right. 
 CAPUCIUS  By heaven, I will, 
 Or let me lose the fashion of a man! 
 KATHARINE  I thank you, honest lord. Remember me 
 In all humility unto his highness: 
 Say his long trouble now is passing 
 Out of this world; tell him, in death I bless'd him, 
 For so I will. Mine eyes grow dim. Farewell, 
 My lord. Griffith, farewell. Nay, Patience, 
 You must not leave me yet: I must to bed; 
 Call in more women. When I am dead, good wench, 
 Let me be used with honour: strew me over 
 With maiden flowers, that all the world may know 
 I was a chaste wife to my grave: embalm me, 
 Then lay me forth: although unqueen'd, yet like 
 A queen, and daughter to a king, inter me. 
 I can no more. 

 Exeunt, leading KATHARINE  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VIII  | Act 4, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 