SCENE II. The French camp. The Life of King Henry the Fifth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry V  | Act 4, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. The French camp. 
 Enter the DAUPHIN, ORLEANS, RAMBURES, and others  ORLEANS  The sun doth gild our armour; up, my lords! 
 DAUPHIN  Montez A cheval! My horse! varlet! laquais! ha! 
 ORLEANS  O brave spirit! 
 DAUPHIN  Via! les eaux et la terre. 
 ORLEANS  Rien puis? L'air et la feu. 
 DAUPHIN  Ciel, cousin Orleans. 

 Enter Constable  Now, my lord constable! 
 Constable  Hark, how our steeds for present service neigh! 
 DAUPHIN  Mount them, and make incision in their hides, 
 That their hot blood may spin in English eyes, 
 And dout them with superfluous courage, ha! 
 RAMBURES  What, will you have them weep our horses' blood? 
 How shall we, then, behold their natural tears? 

 Enter Messenger  Messenger  The English are embattled, you French peers. 
 Constable  To horse, you gallant princes! straight to horse! 
 Do but behold yon poor and starved band, 
 And your fair show shall suck away their souls, 
 Leaving them but the shales and husks of men. 
 There is not work enough for all our hands; 
 Scarce blood enough in all their sickly veins 
 To give each naked curtle-axe a stain, 
 That our French gallants shall to-day draw out, 
 And sheathe for lack of sport: let us but blow on them, 
 The vapour of our valour will o'erturn them. 
 'Tis positive 'gainst all exceptions, lords, 
 That our superfluous lackeys and our peasants, 
 Who in unnecessary action swarm 
 About our squares of battle, were enow 
 To purge this field of such a hilding foe, 
 Though we upon this mountain's basis by 
 Took stand for idle speculation: 
 But that our honours must not. What's to say? 
 A very little little let us do. 
 And all is done. Then let the trumpets sound 
 The tucket sonance and the note to mount; 
 For our approach shall so much dare the field 
 That England shall couch down in fear and yield. 

 Enter GRANDPRE  GRANDPRE  Why do you stay so long, my lords of France? 
 Yon island carrions, desperate of their bones, 
 Ill-favouredly become the morning field: 
 Their ragged curtains poorly are let loose, 
 And our air shakes them passing scornfully: 
 Big Mars seems bankrupt in their beggar'd host 
 And faintly through a rusty beaver peeps: 
 The horsemen sit like fixed candlesticks, 
 With torch-staves in their hand; and their poor jades 
 Lob down their heads, dropping the hides and hips, 
 The gum down-roping from their pale-dead eyes 
 And in their pale dull mouths the gimmal bit 
 Lies foul with chew'd grass, still and motionless; 
 And their executors, the knavish crows, 
 Fly o'er them, all impatient for their hour. 
 Description cannot suit itself in words 
 To demonstrate the life of such a battle 
 In life so lifeless as it shows itself. 
 Constable  They have said their prayers, and they stay for death. 
 DAUPHIN  Shall we go send them dinners and fresh suits 
 And give their fasting horses provender, 
 And after fight with them? 
 Constable  I stay but for my guidon: to the field! 
 I will the banner from a trumpet take, 
 And use it for my haste. Come, come, away! 
 The sun is high, and we outwear the day. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry V  | Act 4, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 