SCENE IV. A Hall in York Place. The Life of King Henry the Eighth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VIII  | Act 1, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE IV. A Hall in York Place. 
 Hautboys. A small table under a state for CARDINAL  WOLSEY, a longer table for the guests. Then enter  ANNE and divers other Ladies and Gentlemen as  guests, at one door; at another door, enter GUILDFORD  GUILDFORD  Ladies, a general welcome from his grace 
 Salutes ye all; this night he dedicates 
 To fair content and you: none here, he hopes, 
 In all this noble bevy, has brought with her 
 One care abroad; he would have all as merry 
 As, first, good company, good wine, good welcome, 
 Can make good people. O, my lord, you're tardy: 

 Enter Chamberlain, SANDS, and LOVELL  The very thought of this fair company 
 Clapp'd wings to me. 
 Chamberlain  You are young, Sir Harry Guildford. 
 SANDS  Sir Thomas Lovell, had the cardinal 
 But half my lay thoughts in him, some of these 
 Should find a running banquet ere they rested, 
 I think would better please 'em: by my life, 
 They are a sweet society of fair ones. 
 LOVELL  O, that your lordship were but now confessor 
 To one or two of these! 
 SANDS  I would I were; 
 They should find easy penance. 
 LOVELL  Faith, how easy? 
 SANDS  As easy as a down-bed would afford it. 
 Chamberlain  Sweet ladies, will it please you sit? Sir Harry, 
 Place you that side; I'll take the charge of this: 
 His grace is entering. Nay, you must not freeze; 
 Two women placed together makes cold weather: 
 My Lord Sands, you are one will keep 'em waking; 
 Pray, sit between these ladies. 
 SANDS  By my faith, 
 And thank your lordship. By your leave, sweet ladies: 
 If I chance to talk a little wild, forgive me; 
 I had it from my father. 
 ANNE  Was he mad, sir? 
 SANDS  O, very mad, exceeding mad, in love too: 
 But he would bite none; just as I do now, 
 He would kiss you twenty with a breath. 

 Kisses her  Chamberlain  Well said, my lord. 
 So, now you're fairly seated. Gentlemen, 
 The penance lies on you, if these fair ladies 
 Pass away frowning. 
 SANDS  For my little cure, 
 Let me alone. 

 Hautboys. Enter CARDINAL WOLSEY, and takes his state  CARDINAL WOLSEY  You're welcome, my fair guests: that noble lady, 
 Or gentleman, that is not freely merry, 
 Is not my friend: this, to confirm my welcome; 
 And to you all, good health. 

 Drinks  SANDS  Your grace is noble: 
 Let me have such a bowl may hold my thanks, 
 And save me so much talking. 
 CARDINAL WOLSEY  My Lord Sands, 
 I am beholding to you: cheer your neighbours. 
 Ladies, you are not merry: gentlemen, 
 Whose fault is this? 
 SANDS  The red wine first must rise 
 In their fair cheeks, my lord; then we shall have 'em 
 Talk us to silence. 
 ANNE  You are a merry gamester, 
 My Lord Sands. 
 SANDS  Yes, if I make my play. 
 Here's to your ladyship: and pledge it, madam, 
 For 'tis to such a thing,-- 
 ANNE  You cannot show me. 
 SANDS  I told your grace they would talk anon. 

 Drum and trumpet, chambers discharged  CARDINAL WOLSEY  What's that? 
 Chamberlain  Look out there, some of ye. 

 Exit Servant  CARDINAL WOLSEY  What warlike voice, 
 And to what end is this? Nay, ladies, fear not; 
 By all the laws of war you're privileged. 

 Re-enter Servant  Chamberlain  How now! what is't? 
 Servant  A noble troop of strangers; 
 For so they seem: they've left their barge and landed; 
 And hither make, as great ambassadors 
 From foreign princes. 
 CARDINAL WOLSEY  Good lord chamberlain, 
 Go, give 'em welcome; you can speak the French tongue; 
 And, pray, receive 'em nobly, and conduct 'em 
 Into our presence, where this heaven of beauty 
 Shall shine at full upon them. Some attend him. 

 Exit Chamberlain, attended. All rise, and tables removed  You have now a broken banquet; but we'll mend it. 
 A good digestion to you all: and once more 
 I shower a welcome on ye; welcome all. 

 Hautboys. Enter KING HENRY VIII and others, as  masquers, habited like shepherds, ushered by the  Chamberlain. They pass directly before CARDINAL WOLSEY, and gracefully salute him  A noble company! what are their pleasures? 
 Chamberlain  Because they speak no English, thus they pray'd 
 To tell your grace, that, having heard by fame 
 Of this so noble and so fair assembly 
 This night to meet here, they could do no less 
 Out of the great respect they bear to beauty, 
 But leave their flocks; and, under your fair conduct, 
 Crave leave to view these ladies and entreat 
 An hour of revels with 'em. 
 CARDINAL WOLSEY  Say, lord chamberlain, 
 They have done my poor house grace; for which I pay 'em 
 A thousand thanks, and pray 'em take their pleasures. 

 They choose Ladies for the dance. KING HENRY VIII chooses ANNE  KING HENRY VIII  The fairest hand I ever touch'd! O beauty, 
 Till now I never knew thee! 

 Music. Dance  CARDINAL WOLSEY  My lord! 
 Chamberlain  Your grace? 
 CARDINAL WOLSEY  Pray, tell 'em thus much from me: 
 There should be one amongst 'em, by his person, 
 More worthy this place than myself; to whom, 
 If I but knew him, with my love and duty 
 I would surrender it. 
 Chamberlain  I will, my lord. 

 Whispers the Masquers  CARDINAL WOLSEY  What say they? 
 Chamberlain  Such a one, they all confess, 
 There is indeed; which they would have your grace 
 Find out, and he will take it. 
 CARDINAL WOLSEY  Let me see, then. 
 By all your good leaves, gentlemen; here I'll make 
 My royal choice. 
 KING HENRY VIII  Ye have found him, cardinal: 

 Unmasking  You hold a fair assembly; you do well, lord: 
 You are a churchman, or, I'll tell you, cardinal, 
 I should judge now unhappily. 
 CARDINAL WOLSEY  I am glad 
 Your grace is grown so pleasant. 
 KING HENRY VIII  My lord chamberlain, 
 Prithee, come hither: what fair lady's that? 
 Chamberlain  An't please your grace, Sir Thomas Bullen's daughter-- 
 The Viscount Rochford,--one of her highness' women. 
 KING HENRY VIII  By heaven, she is a dainty one. Sweetheart, 
 I were unmannerly, to take you out, 
 And not to kiss you. A health, gentlemen! 
 Let it go round. 
 CARDINAL WOLSEY  Sir Thomas Lovell, is the banquet ready 
 I' the privy chamber? 
 LOVELL  Yes, my lord. 
 CARDINAL WOLSEY  Your grace, 
 I fear, with dancing is a little heated. 
 KING HENRY VIII  I fear, too much. 
 CARDINAL WOLSEY  There's fresher air, my lord, 
 In the next chamber. 
 KING HENRY VIII  Lead in your ladies, every one: sweet partner, 
 I must not yet forsake you: let's be merry: 
 Good my lord cardinal, I have half a dozen healths 
 To drink to these fair ladies, and a measure 
 To lead 'em once again; and then let's dream 
 Who's best in favour. Let the music knock it. 

 Exeunt with trumpets  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VIII  | Act 1, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 