SCENE III. London. Before a tavern. The Life of King Henry the Fifth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry V  | Act 2, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. London. Before a tavern. 
 Enter PISTOL, Hostess, NYM, BARDOLPH, and Boy  Hostess  Prithee, honey-sweet husband, let me bring thee to Staines. 
 PISTOL  No; for my manly heart doth yearn. 
 Bardolph, be blithe: Nym, rouse thy vaunting veins: 
 Boy, bristle thy courage up; for Falstaff he is dead, 
 And we must yearn therefore. 
 BARDOLPH  Would I were with him, wheresome'er he is, either in 
 heaven or in hell! 
 Hostess  Nay, sure, he's not in hell: he's in Arthur's 
 bosom, if ever man went to Arthur's bosom. A' made 
 a finer end and went away an it had been any 
 christom child; a' parted even just between twelve 
 and one, even at the turning o' the tide: for after 
 I saw him fumble with the sheets and play with 
 flowers and smile upon his fingers' ends, I knew 
 there was but one way; for his nose was as sharp as 
 a pen, and a' babbled of green fields. 'How now, 
 sir John!' quoth I	'what, man! be o' good 
 cheer.' So a' cried out 'God, God, God!' three or 
 four times. Now I, to comfort him, bid him a' 
 should not think of God; I hoped there was no need 
 to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet. So 
 a' bade me lay more clothes on his feet: I put my 
 hand into the bed and felt them, and they were as 
 cold as any stone; then I felt to his knees, and 
 they were as cold as any stone, and so upward and 
 upward, and all was as cold as any stone. 
 NYM  They say he cried out of sack. 
 Hostess  Ay, that a' did. 
 BARDOLPH  And of women. 
 Hostess  Nay, that a' did not. 
 Boy  Yes, that a' did; and said they were devils 
 incarnate. 
 Hostess  A' could never abide carnation; 'twas a colour he 
 never liked. 
 Boy  A' said once, the devil would have him about women. 
 Hostess  A' did in some sort, indeed, handle women; but then 
 he was rheumatic, and talked of the whore of Babylon. 
 Boy  Do you not remember, a' saw a flea stick upon 
 Bardolph's nose, and a' said it was a black soul 
 burning in hell-fire? 
 BARDOLPH  Well, the fuel is gone that maintained that fire: 
 that's all the riches I got in his service. 
 NYM  Shall we shog? the king will be gone from 
 Southampton. 
 PISTOL  Come, let's away. My love, give me thy lips. 
 Look to my chattels and my movables: 
 Let senses rule; the word is 'Pitch and Pay:' 
 Trust none; 
 For oaths are straws, men's faiths are wafer-cakes, 
 And hold-fast is the only dog, my duck: 
 Therefore, Caveto be thy counsellor. 
 Go, clear thy c rystals. Yoke-fellows in arms, 
 Let us to France; like horse-leeches, my boys, 
 To suck, to suck, the very blood to suck! 
 Boy  And that's but unwholesome food they say. 
 PISTOL  Touch her soft mouth, and march. 
 BARDOLPH  Farewell, hostess. 

 Kissing her  NYM  I cannot kiss, that is the humour of it; but, adieu. 
 PISTOL  Let housewifery appear: keep close, I thee command. 
 Hostess  Farewell; adieu. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry V  | Act 2, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 