SCENE VI. Another part of the field. The Life of King Henry the Fifth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry V  | Act 4, Scene 6 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE VI. Another part of the field. 
 Alarums. Enter KING HENRY and forces, EXETER, and others  KING HENRY V  Well have we done, thrice valiant countrymen: 
 But all's not done; yet keep the French the field. 
 EXETER  The Duke of York commends him to your majesty. 
 KING HENRY V  Lives he, good uncle? thrice within this hour 
 I saw him down; thrice up again and fighting; 
 From helmet to the spur all blood he was. 
 EXETER  In which array, brave soldier, doth he lie, 
 Larding the plain; and by his bloody side, 
 Yoke-fellow to his honour-owing wounds, 
 The noble Earl of Suffolk also lies. 
 Suffolk first died: and York, all haggled over, 
 Comes to him, where in gore he lay insteep'd, 
 And takes him by the beard; kisses the gashes 
 That bloodily did spawn upon his face; 
 And cries aloud 'Tarry, dear cousin Suffolk! 
 My soul shall thine keep company to heaven; 
 Tarry, sweet soul, for mine, then fly abreast, 
 As in this glorious and well-foughten field 
 We kept together in our chivalry!' 
 Upon these words I came and cheer'd him up: 
 He smiled me in the face, raught me his hand, 
 And, with a feeble gripe, says 'Dear my lord, 
 Commend my service to me sovereign.' 
 So did he turn and over Suffolk's neck 
 He threw his wounded arm and kiss'd his lips; 
 And so espoused to death, with blood he seal'd 
 A testament of noble-ending love. 
 The pretty and sweet manner of it forced 
 Those waters from me which I would have stopp'd; 
 But I had not so much of man in me, 
 And all my mother came into mine eyes 
 And gave me up to tears. 
 KING HENRY V  I blame you not; 
 For, hearing this, I must perforce compound 
 With mistful eyes, or they will issue too. 

 Alarum  But, hark! what new alarum is this same? 
 The French have reinforced their scatter'd men: 
 Then every soldier kill his prisoners: 
 Give the word through. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry V  | Act 4, Scene 6 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 