SCENE II. CAESAR's house. The Life and Death of Julius Caesar  Shakespeare homepage  |  Julius Caesar  | Act 2, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. CAESAR's house. 
 Thunder and lightning. Enter CAESAR, in his night-gown  CAESAR  Nor heaven nor earth have been at peace to-night: 
 Thrice hath Calpurnia in her sleep cried out, 
 'Help, ho! they murder Caesar!' Who's within? 

 Enter a Servant  Servant  My lord? 
 CAESAR  Go bid the priests do present sacrifice 
 And bring me their opinions of success. 
 Servant  I will, my lord. 

 Exit 
 Enter CALPURNIA  CALPURNIA  What mean you, Caesar? think you to walk forth? 
 You shall not stir out of your house to-day. 
 CAESAR  Caesar shall forth: the things that threaten'd me 
 Ne'er look'd but on my back; when they shall see 
 The face of Caesar, they are vanished. 
 CALPURNIA  Caesar, I never stood on ceremonies, 
 Yet now they fright me. There is one within, 
 Besides the things that we have heard and seen, 
 Recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch. 
 A lioness hath whelped in the streets; 
 And graves have yawn'd, and yielded up their dead; 
 Fierce fiery warriors fought upon the clouds, 
 In ranks and squadrons and right form of war, 
 Which drizzled blood upon the Capitol; 
 The noise of battle hurtled in the air, 
 Horses did neigh, and dying men did groan, 
 And ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets. 
 O Caesar! these things are beyond all use, 
 And I do fear them. 
 CAESAR  What can be avoided 
 Whose end is purposed by the mighty gods? 
 Yet Caesar shall go forth; for these predictions 
 Are to the world in general as to Caesar. 
 CALPURNIA  When beggars die, there are no comets seen; 
 The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes. 
 CAESAR  Cowards die many times before their deaths; 
 The valiant never taste of death but once. 
 Of all the wonders that I yet have heard. 
 It seems to me most strange that men should fear; 
 Seeing that death, a necessary end, 
 Will come when it will come. 

 Re-enter Servant  What say the augurers? 
 Servant  They would not have you to stir forth to-day. 
 Plucking the entrails of an offering forth, 
 They could not find a heart within the beast. 
 CAESAR  The gods do this in shame of cowardice: 
 Caesar should be a beast without a heart, 
 If he should stay at home to-day for fear. 
 No, Caesar shall not: danger knows full well 
 That Caesar is more dangerous than he: 
 We are two lions litter'd in one day, 
 And I the elder and more terrible: 
 And Caesar shall go forth. 
 CALPURNIA  Alas, my lord, 
 Your wisdom is consumed in confidence. 
 Do not go forth to-day: call it my fear 
 That keeps you in the house, and not your own. 
 We'll send Mark Antony to the senate-house: 
 And he shall say you are not well to-day: 
 Let me, upon my knee, prevail in this. 
 CAESAR  Mark Antony shall say I am not well, 
 And, for thy humour, I will stay at home. 

 Enter DECIUS BRUTUS  Here's Decius Brutus, he shall tell them so. 
 DECIUS BRUTUS  Caesar, all hail! good morrow, worthy Caesar: 
 I come to fetch you to the senate-house. 
 CAESAR  And you are come in very happy time, 
 To bear my greeting to the senators 
 And tell them that I will not come to-day: 
 Cannot, is false, and that I dare not, falser: 
 I will not come to-day: tell them so, Decius. 
 CALPURNIA  Say he is sick. 
 CAESAR  Shall Caesar send a lie? 
 Have I in conquest stretch'd mine arm so far, 
 To be afraid to tell graybeards the truth? 
 Decius, go tell them Caesar will not come. 
 DECIUS BRUTUS  Most mighty Caesar, let me know some cause, 
 Lest I be laugh'd at when I tell them so. 
 CAESAR  The cause is in my will: I will not come; 
 That is enough to satisfy the senate. 
 But for your private satisfaction, 
 Because I love you, I will let you know: 
 Calpurnia here, my wife, stays me at home: 
 She dreamt to-night she saw my statua, 
 Which, like a fountain with an hundred spouts, 
 Did run pure blood: and many lusty Romans 
 Came smiling, and did bathe their hands in it: 
 And these does she apply for warnings, and portents, 
 And evils imminent; and on her knee 
 Hath begg'd that I will stay at home to-day. 
 DECIUS BRUTUS  This dream is all amiss interpreted; 
 It was a vision fair and fortunate: 
 Your statue spouting blood in many pipes, 
 In which so many smiling Romans bathed, 
 Signifies that from you great Rome shall suck 
 Reviving blood, and that great men shall press 
 For tinctures, stains, relics and cognizance. 
 This by Calpurnia's dream is signified. 
 CAESAR  And this way have you well expounded it. 
 DECIUS BRUTUS  I have, when you have heard what I can say: 
 And know it now: the senate have concluded 
 To give this day a crown to mighty Caesar. 
 If you shall send them word you will not come, 
 Their minds may change. Besides, it were a mock 
 Apt to be render'd, for some one to say 
 'Break up the senate till another time, 
 When Caesar's wife shall meet with better dreams.' 
 If Caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper 
 'Lo, Caesar is afraid'? 
 Pardon me, Caesar; for my dear dear love 
 To our proceeding bids me tell you this; 
 And reason to my love is liable. 
 CAESAR  How foolish do your fears seem now, Calpurnia! 
 I am ashamed I did yield to them. 
 Give me my robe, for I will go. 

 Enter PUBLIUS, BRUTUS, LIGARIUS, METELLUS, CASCA, TREBONIUS, and CINNA  And look where Publius is come to fetch me. 
 PUBLIUS  Good morrow, Caesar. 
 CAESAR  Welcome, Publius. 
 What, Brutus, are you stirr'd so early too? 
 Good morrow, Casca. Caius Ligarius, 
 Caesar was ne'er so much your enemy 
 As that same ague which hath made you lean. 
 What is 't o'clock? 
 BRUTUS  Caesar, 'tis strucken eight. 
 CAESAR  I thank you for your pains and courtesy. 

 Enter ANTONY  See! Antony, that revels long o' nights, 
 Is notwithstanding up. Good morrow, Antony. 
 ANTONY  So to most noble Caesar. 
 CAESAR  Bid them prepare within: 
 I am to blame to be thus waited for. 
 Now, Cinna: now, Metellus: what, Trebonius! 
 I have an hour's talk in store for you; 
 Remember that you call on me to-day: 
 Be near me, that I may remember you. 
 TREBONIUS  Caesar, I will: 

 Aside  and so near will I be, 
 That your best friends shall wish I had been further. 
 CAESAR  Good friends, go in, and taste some wine with me; 
 And we, like friends, will straightway go together. 
 BRUTUS  [Aside]  That every like is not the same, O Caesar, 
 The heart of Brutus yearns to think upon! 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Julius Caesar  | Act 2, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 