SCENE I. A house in Rome. The Life and Death of Julius Caesar  Shakespeare homepage  |  Julius Caesar  | Act 4, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. A house in Rome. 
 ANTONY, OCTAVIUS, and LEPIDUS, seated at a table  ANTONY  These many, then, shall die; their names are prick'd. 
 OCTAVIUS  Your brother too must die; consent you, Lepidus? 
 LEPIDUS  I do consent-- 
 OCTAVIUS  Prick him down, Antony. 
 LEPIDUS  Upon condition Publius shall not live, 
 Who is your sister's son, Mark Antony. 
 ANTONY  He shall not live; look, with a spot I damn him. 
 But, Lepidus, go you to Caesar's house; 
 Fetch the will hither, and we shall determine 
 How to cut off some charge in legacies. 
 LEPIDUS  What, shall I find you here? 
 OCTAVIUS  Or here, or at the Capitol. 

 Exit LEPIDUS  ANTONY  This is a slight unmeritable man, 
 Meet to be sent on errands: is it fit, 
 The three-fold world divided, he should stand 
 One of the three to share it? 
 OCTAVIUS  So you thought him; 
 And took his voice who should be prick'd to die, 
 In our black sentence and proscription. 
 ANTONY  Octavius, I have seen more days than you: 
 And though we lay these honours on this man, 
 To ease ourselves of divers slanderous loads, 
 He shall but bear them as the ass bears gold, 
 To groan and sweat under the business, 
 Either led or driven, as we point the way; 
 And having brought our treasure where we will, 
 Then take we down his load, and turn him off, 
 Like to the empty ass, to shake his ears, 
 And graze in commons. 
 OCTAVIUS  You may do your will; 
 But he's a tried and valiant soldier. 
 ANTONY  So is my horse, Octavius; and for that 
 I do appoint him store of provender: 
 It is a creature that I teach to fight, 
 To wind, to stop, to run directly on, 
 His corporal motion govern'd by my spirit. 
 And, in some taste, is Lepidus but so; 
 He must be taught and train'd and bid go forth; 
 A barren-spirited fellow; one that feeds 
 On abjects, orts and imitations, 
 Which, out of use and staled by other men, 
 Begin his fashion: do not talk of him, 
 But as a property. And now, Octavius, 
 Listen great things:--Brutus and Cassius 
 Are levying powers: we must straight make head: 
 Therefore let our alliance be combined, 
 Our best friends made, our means stretch'd 
 And let us presently go sit in council, 
 How covert matters may be best disclosed, 
 And open perils surest answered. 
 OCTAVIUS  Let us do so: for we are at the stake, 
 And bay'd about with many enemies; 
 And some that smile have in their hearts, I fear, 
 Millions of mischiefs. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Julius Caesar  | Act 4, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 