SCENE I. A heath. King Lear  Shakespeare homepage  |  King Lear  | Act 3, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. A heath. 
 Storm still. Enter KENT and a Gentleman, meeting  KENT  Who's there, besides foul weather? 
 Gentleman  One minded like the weather, most unquietly. 
 KENT  I know you. Where's the king? 
 Gentleman  Contending with the fretful element: 
 Bids the winds blow the earth into the sea, 
 Or swell the curled water 'bove the main, 
 That things might change or cease; tears his white hair, 
 Which the impetuous blasts, with eyeless rage, 
 Catch in their fury, and make nothing of; 
 Strives in his little world of man to out-scorn 
 The to-and-fro-conflicting wind and rain. 
 This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch, 
 The lion and the belly-pinched wolf 
 Keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs, 
 And bids what will take all. 
 KENT  But who is with him? 
 Gentleman  None but the fool; who labours to out-jest 
 His heart-struck injuries. 
 KENT  Sir, I do know you; 
 And dare, upon the warrant of my note, 
 Commend a dear thing to you. There is division, 
 Although as yet the face of it be cover'd 
 With mutual cunning, 'twixt Albany and Cornwall; 
 Who have--as who have not, that their great stars 
 Throned and set high?--servants, who seem no less, 
 Which are to France the spies and speculations 
 Intelligent of our state; what hath been seen, 
 Either in snuffs and packings of the dukes, 
 Or the hard rein which both of them have borne 
 Against the old kind king; or something deeper, 
 Whereof perchance these are but furnishings; 
 But, true it is, from France there comes a power 
 Into this scatter'd kingdom; who already, 
 Wise in our negligence, have secret feet 
 In some of our best ports, and are at point 
 To show their open banner. Now to you: 
 If on my credit you dare build so far 
 To make your speed to Dover, you shall find 
 Some that will thank you, making just report 
 Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow 
 The king hath cause to plain. 
 I am a gentleman of blood and breeding; 
 And, from some knowledge and assurance, offer 
 This office to you. 
 Gentleman  I will talk further with you. 
 KENT  No, do not. 
 For confirmation that I am much more 
 Than my out-wall, open this purse, and take 
 What it contains. If you shall see Cordelia,-- 
 As fear not but you shall,--show her this ring; 
 And she will tell you who your fellow is 
 That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm! 
 I will go seek the king. 
 Gentleman  Give me your hand: have you no more to say? 
 KENT  Few words, but, to effect, more than all yet; 
 That, when we have found the king,--in which your pain 
 That way, I'll this,--he that first lights on him 
 Holla the other. 

 Exeunt severally  Shakespeare homepage  |  King Lear  | Act 3, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 