SCENE V. Gloucester's castle. King Lear  Shakespeare homepage  |  King Lear  | Act 4, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE V. Gloucester's castle. 
 Enter REGAN and OSWALD  REGAN  But are my brother's powers set forth? 
 OSWALD  Ay, madam. 
 REGAN  Himself in person there? 
 OSWALD  Madam, with much ado: 
 Your sister is the better soldier. 
 REGAN  Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home? 
 OSWALD  No, madam. 
 REGAN  What might import my sister's letter to him? 
 OSWALD  I know not, lady. 
 REGAN  'Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter. 
 It was great ignorance, Gloucester's eyes being out, 
 To let him live: where he arrives he moves 
 All hearts against us: Edmund, I think, is gone, 
 In pity of his misery, to dispatch 
 His nighted life: moreover, to descry 
 The strength o' the enemy. 
 OSWALD  I must needs after him, madam, with my letter. 
 REGAN  Our troops set forth to-morrow: stay with us; 
 The ways are dangerous. 
 OSWALD  I may not, madam: 
 My lady charged my duty in this business. 
 REGAN  Why should she write to Edmund? Might not you 
 Transport her purposes by word? Belike, 
 Something--I know not what: I'll love thee much, 
 Let me unseal the letter. 
 OSWALD  Madam, I had rather-- 
 REGAN  I know your lady does not love her husband; 
 I am sure of that: and at her late being here 
 She gave strange oeillades and most speaking looks 
 To noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom. 
 OSWALD  I, madam? 
 REGAN  I speak in understanding; you are; I know't: 
 Therefore I do advise you, take this note: 
 My lord is dead; Edmund and I have talk'd; 
 And more convenient is he for my hand 
 Than for your lady's: you may gather more. 
 If you do find him, pray you, give him this; 
 And when your mistress hears thus much from you, 
 I pray, desire her call her wisdom to her. 
 So, fare you well. 
 If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor, 
 Preferment falls on him that cuts him off. 
 OSWALD  Would I could meet him, madam! I should show 
 What party I do follow. 
 REGAN  Fare thee well. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  King Lear  | Act 4, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 