SCENE III. The French camp near Dover. King Lear  Shakespeare homepage  |  King Lear  | Act 4, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. The French camp near Dover. 
 Enter KENT and a Gentleman  KENT  Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back 
 know you the reason? 
 Gentleman  Something he left imperfect in the 
 state, which since his coming forth is thought 
 of; which imports to the kingdom so much 
 fear and danger, that his personal return was 
 most required and necessary. 
 KENT  Who hath he left behind him general? 
 Gentleman  The Marshal of France, Monsieur La Far. 
 KENT  Did your letters pierce the queen to any 
 demonstration of grief? 
 Gentleman  Ay, sir; she took them, read them in my presence; 
 And now and then an ample tear trill'd down 
 Her delicate cheek: it seem'd she was a queen 
 Over her passion; who, most rebel-like, 
 Sought to be king o'er her. 
 KENT  O, then it moved her. 
 Gentleman  Not to a rage: patience and sorrow strove 
 Who should express her goodliest. You have seen 
 Sunshine and rain at once: her smiles and tears 
 Were like a better way: those happy smilets, 
 That play'd on her ripe lip, seem'd not to know 
 What guests were in her eyes; which parted thence, 
 As pearls from diamonds dropp'd. In brief, 
 Sorrow would be a rarity most beloved, 
 If all could so become it. 
 KENT  Made she no verbal question? 
 Gentleman  'Faith, once or twice she heaved the name of 'father' 
 Pantingly forth, as if it press'd her heart: 
 Cried 'Sisters! sisters! Shame of ladies! sisters! 
 Kent! father! sisters! What, i' the storm? i' the night? 
 Let pity not be believed!' There she shook 
 The holy water from her heavenly eyes, 
 And clamour moisten'd: then away she started 
 To deal with grief alone. 
 KENT  It is the stars, 
 The stars above us, govern our conditions; 
 Else one self mate and mate could not beget 
 Such different issues. You spoke not with her since? 
 Gentleman  No. 
 KENT  Was this before the king return'd? 
 Gentleman  No, since. 
 KENT  Well, sir, the poor distressed Lear's i' the town; 
 Who sometime, in his better tune, remembers 
 What we are come about, and by no means 
 Will yield to see his daughter. 
 Gentleman  Why, good sir? 
 KENT  A sovereign shame so elbows him: his own unkindness, 
 That stripp'd her from his benediction, turn'd her 
 To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights 
 To his dog-hearted daughters, these things sting 
 His mind so venomously, that burning shame 
 Detains him from Cordelia. 
 Gentleman  Alack, poor gentleman! 
 KENT  Of Albany's and Cornwall's powers you heard not? 
 Gentleman  'Tis so, they are afoot. 
 KENT  Well, sir, I'll bring you to our master Lear, 
 And leave you to attend him: some dear cause 
 Will in concealment wrap me up awhile; 
 When I am known aright, you shall not grieve 
 Lending me this acquaintance. I pray you, go 
 Along with me. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  King Lear  | Act 4, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 