SCENE I. The same. Loves Labours Lost  Shakespeare homepage  |  Love's Labour's Lost  | Act 5, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. The same. 
 Enter HOLOFERNES, SIR NATHANIEL, and DULL  HOLOFERNES  Satis quod sufficit. 
 SIR NATHANIEL  I praise God for you, sir: your reasons at dinner 
 have been sharp and sententious; pleasant without 
 scurrility, witty without affection, audacious without 
 impudency, learned without opinion, and strange with- 
 out heresy. I did converse this quondam day with 
 a companion of the king's, who is intituled, nomi- 
 nated, or called, Don Adriano de Armado. 
 HOLOFERNES  Novi hominem tanquam te: his humour is lofty, his 
 discourse peremptory, his tongue filed, his eye 
 ambitious, his gait majestical, and his general 
 behavior vain, ridiculous, and thrasonical. He is 
 too picked, too spruce, too affected, too odd, as it 
 were, too peregrinate, as I may call it. 
 SIR NATHANIEL  A most singular and choice epithet. 

 Draws out his table-book  HOLOFERNES  He draweth out the thread of his verbosity finer 
 than the staple of his argument. I abhor such 
 fanatical phantasimes, such insociable and 
 point-devise companions; such rackers of 
 orthography, as to speak dout, fine, when he should 
 say doubt; det, when he should pronounce debt,--d, 
 e, b, t, not d, e, t: he clepeth a calf, cauf; 
 half, hauf; neighbour vocatur nebor; neigh 
 abbreviated ne. This is abhominable,--which he 
 would call abbominable: it insinuateth me of 
 insanie: anne intelligis, domine? to make frantic, lunatic. 
 SIR NATHANIEL  Laus Deo, bene intelligo. 
 HOLOFERNES  Bon, bon, fort bon, Priscian! a little scratch'd, 
 'twill serve. 
 SIR NATHANIEL  Videsne quis venit? 
 HOLOFERNES  Video, et gaudeo. 

 Enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO, MOTH, and COSTARD  DON 
 ADRIANO DE ARMADO  Chirrah! 

 To MOTH  HOLOFERNES  Quare chirrah, not sirrah? 
 DON 
 ADRIANO DE ARMADO  Men of peace, well encountered. 
 HOLOFERNES  Most military sir, salutation. 
 MOTH  [Aside to COSTARD]  They have been at a great feast 
 of languages, and stolen the scraps. 
 COSTARD  O, they have lived long on the alms-basket of words. 
 I marvel thy master hath not eaten thee for a word; 
 for thou art not so long by the head as 
 honorificabilitudinitatibus: thou art easier 
 swallowed than a flap-dragon. 
 MOTH  Peace! the peal begins. 
 DON 
 ADRIANO DE ARMADO  [To HOLOFERNES]  Monsieur, are you not lettered? 
 MOTH  Yes, yes; he teaches boys the hornbook. What is a, 
 b, spelt backward, with the horn on his head? 
 HOLOFERNES  Ba, pueritia, with a horn added. 
 MOTH  Ba, most silly sheep with a horn. You hear his learning. 
 HOLOFERNES  Quis, quis, thou consonant? 
 MOTH  The third of the five vowels, if you repeat them; or 
 the fifth, if I. 
 HOLOFERNES  I will repeat them,--a, e, i,-- 
 MOTH  The sheep: the other two concludes it,--o, u. 
 DON 
 ADRIANO DE ARMADO  Now, by the salt wave of the Mediterraneum, a sweet 
 touch, a quick venue of wit! snip, snap, quick and 
 home! it rejoiceth my intellect: true wit! 
 MOTH  Offered by a child to an old man; which is wit-old. 
 HOLOFERNES  What is the figure? what is the figure? 
 MOTH  Horns. 
 HOLOFERNES  Thou disputest like an infant: go, whip thy gig. 
 MOTH  Lend me your horn to make one, and I will whip about 
 your infamy circum circa,--a gig of a cuckold's horn. 
 COSTARD  An I had but one penny in the world, thou shouldst 
 have it to buy gingerbread: hold, there is the very 
 remuneration I had of thy master, thou halfpenny 
 purse of wit, thou pigeon-egg of discretion. O, an 
 the heavens were so pleased that thou wert but my 
 bastard, what a joyful father wouldst thou make me! 
 Go to; thou hast it ad dunghill, at the fingers' 
 ends, as they say. 
 HOLOFERNES  O, I smell false Latin; dunghill for unguem. 
 DON 
 ADRIANO DE ARMADO  Arts-man, preambulate, we will be singled from the 
 barbarous. Do you not educate youth at the 
 charge-house on the top of the mountain? 
 HOLOFERNES  Or mons, the hill. 
 DON 
 ADRIANO DE ARMADO  At your sweet pleasure, for the mountain. 
 HOLOFERNES  I do, sans question. 
 DON 
 ADRIANO DE ARMADO  Sir, it is the king's most sweet pleasure and 
 affection to congratulate the princess at her 
 pavilion in the posteriors of this day, which the 
 rude multitude call the afternoon. 
 HOLOFERNES  The posterior of the day, most generous sir, is 
 liable, congruent and measurable for the afternoon: 
 the word is well culled, chose, sweet and apt, I do 
 assure you, sir, I do assure. 
 DON 
 ADRIANO DE ARMADO  Sir, the king is a noble gentleman, and my familiar, 
 I do assure ye, very good friend: for what is 
 inward between us, let it pass. I do beseech thee, 
 remember thy courtesy; I beseech thee, apparel thy 
 head: and among other important and most serious 
 designs, and of great import indeed, too, but let 
 that pass: for I must tell thee, it will please his 
 grace, by the world, sometime to lean upon my poor 
 shoulder, and with his royal finger, thus, dally 
 with my excrement, with my mustachio; but, sweet 
 heart, let that pass. By the world, I recount no 
 fable: some certain special honours it pleaseth his 
 greatness to impart to Armado, a soldier, a man of 
 travel, that hath seen the world; but let that pass. 
 The very all of all is,--but, sweet heart, I do 
 implore secrecy,--that the king would have me 
 present the princess, sweet chuck, with some 
 delightful ostentation, or show, or pageant, or 
 antique, or firework. Now, understanding that the 
 curate and your sweet self are good at such 
 eruptions and sudden breaking out of mirth, as it 
 were, I have acquainted you withal, to the end to 
 crave your assistance. 
 HOLOFERNES  Sir, you shall present before her the Nine Worthies. 
 Sir, as concerning some entertainment of time, some 
 show in the posterior of this day, to be rendered by 
 our assistants, at the king's command, and this most 
 gallant, illustrate, and learned gentleman, before 
 the princess; I say none so fit as to present the 
 Nine Worthies. 
 SIR NATHANIEL  Where will you find men worthy enough to present them? 
 HOLOFERNES  Joshua, yourself; myself and this gallant gentleman, 
 Judas Maccabaeus; this swain, because of his great 
 limb or joint, shall pass Pompey the Great; the 
 page, Hercules,-- 
 DON 
 ADRIANO DE ARMADO  Pardon, sir; error: he is not quantity enough for 
 that Worthy's thumb: he is not so big as the end of his club. 
 HOLOFERNES  Shall I have audience? he shall present Hercules in 
 minority: his enter and exit shall be strangling a 
 snake; and I will have an apology for that purpose. 
 MOTH  An excellent device! so, if any of the audience 
 hiss, you may cry 'Well done, Hercules! now thou 
 crushest the snake!' that is the way to make an 
 offence gracious, though few have the grace to do it. 
 DON 
 ADRIANO DE ARMADO  For the rest of the Worthies?-- 
 HOLOFERNES  I will play three myself. 
 MOTH  Thrice-worthy gentleman! 
 DON 
 ADRIANO DE ARMADO  Shall I tell you a thing? 
 HOLOFERNES  We attend. 
 DON 
 ADRIANO DE ARMADO  We will have, if this fadge not, an antique. I 
 beseech you, follow. 
 HOLOFERNES  Via, goodman Dull! thou hast spoken no word all this while. 
 DULL  Nor understood none neither, sir. 
 HOLOFERNES  Allons! we will employ thee. 
 DULL  I'll make one in a dance, or so; or I will play 
 On the tabour to the Worthies, and let them dance the hay. 
 HOLOFERNES  Most dull, honest Dull! To our sport, away! 

 Exeunt  LOVE'S LABOURS LOST 
 Shakespeare homepage  |  Love's Labour's Lost  | Act 5, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 