SCENE V. Inverness. Macbeth's castle. The Tragedy of Macbeth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Macbeth  | Act 1, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE V. Inverness. Macbeth's castle. 
 Enter LADY MACBETH, reading a letter  LADY MACBETH  'They met me in the day of success: and I have 
 learned by the perfectest report, they have more in 
 them than mortal knowledge. When I burned in desire 
 to question them further, they made themselves air, 
 into which they vanished. Whiles I stood rapt in 
 the wonder of it, came missives from the king, who 
 all-hailed me 'Thane of Cawdor;' by which title, 
 before, these weird sisters saluted me, and referred 
 me to the coming on of time, with 'Hail, king that 
 shalt be!' This have I thought good to deliver 
 thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou 
 mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being 
 ignorant of what greatness is promised thee. Lay it 
 to thy heart, and farewell.' 
 Glamis thou art, and Cawdor; and shalt be 
 What thou art promised: yet do I fear thy nature; 
 It is too full o' the milk of human kindness 
 To catch the nearest way: thou wouldst be great; 
 Art not without ambition, but without 
 The illness should attend it: what thou wouldst highly, 
 That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false, 
 And yet wouldst wrongly win: thou'ldst have, great Glamis, 
 That which cries 'Thus thou must do, if thou have it; 
 And that which rather thou dost fear to do 
 Than wishest should be undone.' Hie thee hither, 
 That I may pour my spirits in thine ear; 
 And chastise with the valour of my tongue 
 All that impedes thee from the golden round, 
 Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem 
 To have thee crown'd withal. 

 Enter a Messenger  What is your tidings? 
 Messenger  The king comes here to-night. 
 LADY MACBETH  Thou'rt mad to say it: 
 Is not thy master with him? who, were't so, 
 Would have inform'd for preparation. 
 Messenger  So please you, it is true: our thane is coming: 
 One of my fellows had the speed of him, 
 Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more 
 Than would make up his message. 
 LADY MACBETH  Give him tending; 
 He brings great news. 

 Exit Messenger  The raven himself is hoarse 
 That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan 
 Under my battlements. Come, you spirits 
 That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here, 
 And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full 
 Of direst cruelty! make thick my blood; 
 Stop up the access and passage to remorse, 
 That no compunctious visitings of nature 
 Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between 
 The effect and it! Come to my woman's breasts, 
 And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers, 
 Wherever in your sightless substances 
 You wait on nature's mischief! Come, thick night, 
 And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell, 
 That my keen knife see not the wound it makes, 
 Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark, 
 To cry 'Hold, hold!' 

 Enter MACBETH  Great Glamis! worthy Cawdor! 
 Greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter! 
 Thy letters have transported me beyond 
 This ignorant present, and I feel now 
 The future in the instant. 
 MACBETH  My dearest love, 
 Duncan comes here to-night. 
 LADY MACBETH  And when goes hence? 
 MACBETH  To-morrow, as he purposes. 
 LADY MACBETH  O, never 
 Shall sun that morrow see! 
 Your face, my thane, is as a book where men 
 May read strange matters. To beguile the time, 
 Look like the time; bear welcome in your eye, 
 Your hand, your tongue: look like the innocent flower, 
 But be the serpent under't. He that's coming 
 Must be provided for: and you shall put 
 This night's great business into my dispatch; 
 Which shall to all our nights and days to come 
 Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom. 
 MACBETH  We will speak further. 
 LADY MACBETH  Only look up clear; 
 To alter favour ever is to fear: 
 Leave all the rest to me. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Macbeth  | Act 1, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 