SCENE VI. Before Macbeth's castle. The Tragedy of Macbeth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Macbeth  | Act 1, Scene 6 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE VI. Before Macbeth's castle. 
 Hautboys and torches. Enter DUNCAN, MALCOLM,  DONALBAIN, BANQUO, LENNOX, MACDUFF, ROSS, ANGUS, and Attendants  DUNCAN  This castle hath a pleasant seat; the air 
 Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself 
 Unto our gentle senses. 
 BANQUO  This guest of summer, 
 The temple-haunting martlet, does approve, 
 By his loved mansionry, that the heaven's breath 
 Smells wooingly here: no jutty, frieze, 
 Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird 
 Hath made his pendent bed and procreant cradle: 
 Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed, 
 The air is delicate. 

 Enter LADY MACBETH  DUNCAN  See, see, our honour'd hostess! 
 The love that follows us sometime is our trouble, 
 Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you 
 How you shall bid God 'ild us for your pains, 
 And thank us for your trouble. 
 LADY MACBETH  All our service 
 In every point twice done and then done double 
 Were poor and single business to contend 
 Against those honours deep and broad wherewith 
 Your majesty loads our house: for those of old, 
 And the late dignities heap'd up to them, 
 We rest your hermits. 
 DUNCAN  Where's the thane of Cawdor? 
 We coursed him at the heels, and had a purpose 
 To be his purveyor: but he rides well; 
 And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him 
 To his home before us. Fair and noble hostess, 
 We are your guest to-night. 
 LADY MACBETH  Your servants ever 
 Have theirs, themselves and what is theirs, in compt, 
 To make their audit at your highness' pleasure, 
 Still to return your own. 
 DUNCAN  Give me your hand; 
 Conduct me to mine host: we love him highly, 
 And shall continue our graces towards him. 
 By your leave, hostess. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Macbeth  | Act 1, Scene 6 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 