SCENE VII. Macbeth's castle. The Tragedy of Macbeth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Macbeth  | Act 1, Scene 7 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE VII. Macbeth's castle. 
 Hautboys and torches. Enter a Sewer, and divers  Servants with dishes and service, and pass over the stage. Then enter MACBETH  MACBETH  If it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well 
 It were done quickly: if the assassination 
 Could trammel up the consequence, and catch 
 With his surcease success; that but this blow 
 Might be the be-all and the end-all here, 
 But here, upon this bank and shoal of time, 
 We'ld jump the life to come. But in these cases 
 We still have judgment here; that we but teach 
 Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return 
 To plague the inventor: this even-handed justice 
 Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice 
 To our own lips. He's here in double trust; 
 First, as I am his kinsman and his subject, 
 Strong both against the deed; then, as his host, 
 Who should against his murderer shut the door, 
 Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan 
 Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been 
 So clear in his great office, that his virtues 
 Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against 
 The deep damnation of his taking-off; 
 And pity, like a naked new-born babe, 
 Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, horsed 
 Upon the sightless couriers of the air, 
 Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye, 
 That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur 
 To prick the sides of my intent, but only 
 Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself 
 And falls on the other. 

 Enter LADY MACBETH  How now! what news? 
 LADY MACBETH  He has almost supp'd: why have you left the chamber? 
 MACBETH  Hath he ask'd for me? 
 LADY MACBETH  Know you not he has? 
 MACBETH  We will proceed no further in this business: 
 He hath honour'd me of late; and I have bought 
 Golden opinions from all sorts of people, 
 Which would be worn now in their newest gloss, 
 Not cast aside so soon. 
 LADY MACBETH  Was the hope drunk 
 Wherein you dress'd yourself? hath it slept since? 
 And wakes it now, to look so green and pale 
 At what it did so freely? From this time 
 Such I account thy love. Art thou afeard 
 To be the same in thine own act and valour 
 As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that 
 Which thou esteem'st the ornament of life, 
 And live a coward in thine own esteem, 
 Letting 'I dare not' wait upon 'I would,' 
 Like the poor cat i' the adage? 
 MACBETH  Prithee, peace: 
 I dare do all that may become a man; 
 Who dares do more is none. 
 LADY MACBETH  What beast was't, then, 
 That made you break this enterprise to me? 
 When you durst do it, then you were a man; 
 And, to be more than what you were, you would 
 Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place 
 Did then adhere, and yet you would make both: 
 They have made themselves, and that their fitness now 
 Does unmake you. I have given suck, and know 
 How tender 'tis to love the babe that milks me: 
 I would, while it was smiling in my face, 
 Have pluck'd my nipple from his boneless gums, 
 And dash'd the brains out, had I so sworn as you 
 Have done to this. 
 MACBETH  If we should fail? 
 LADY MACBETH  We fail! 
 But screw your courage to the sticking-place, 
 And we'll not fail. When Duncan is asleep-- 
 Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey 
 Soundly invite him--his two chamberlains 
 Will I with wine and wassail so convince 
 That memory, the warder of the brain, 
 Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason 
 A limbeck only: when in swinish sleep 
 Their drenched natures lie as in a death, 
 What cannot you and I perform upon 
 The unguarded Duncan? what not put upon 
 His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt 
 Of our great quell? 
 MACBETH  Bring forth men-children only; 
 For thy undaunted mettle should compose 
 Nothing but males. Will it not be received, 
 When we have mark'd with blood those sleepy two 
 Of his own chamber and used their very daggers, 
 That they have done't? 
 LADY MACBETH  Who dares receive it other, 
 As we shall make our griefs and clamour roar 
 Upon his death? 
 MACBETH  I am settled, and bend up 
 Each corporal agent to this terrible feat. 
 Away, and mock the time with fairest show: 
 False face must hide what the false heart doth know. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Macbeth  | Act 1, Scene 7 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 