SCENE I. Dunsinane. Ante-room in the castle. The Tragedy of Macbeth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Macbeth  | Act 5, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. Dunsinane. Ante-room in the castle. 
 Enter a Doctor of Physic and a Waiting-Gentlewoman  Doctor  I have two nights watched with you, but can perceive 
 no truth in your report. When was it she last walked? 
 Gentlewoman  Since his majesty went into the field, I have seen 
 her rise from her bed, throw her night-gown upon 
 her, unlock her closet, take forth paper, fold it, 
 write upon't, read it, afterwards seal it, and again 
 return to bed; yet all this while in a most fast sleep. 
 Doctor  A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once 
 the benefit of sleep, and do the effects of 
 watching! In this slumbery agitation, besides her 
 walking and other actual performances, what, at any 
 time, have you heard her say? 
 Gentlewoman  That, sir, which I will not report after her. 
 Doctor  You may to me: and 'tis most meet you should. 
 Gentlewoman  Neither to you nor any one; having no witness to 
 confirm my speech. 

 Enter LADY MACBETH, with a taper  Lo you, here she comes! This is her very guise; 
 and, upon my life, fast asleep. Observe her; stand close. 
 Doctor  How came she by that light? 
 Gentlewoman  Why, it stood by her: she has light by her 
 continually; 'tis her command. 
 Doctor  You see, her eyes are open. 
 Gentlewoman  Ay, but their sense is shut. 
 Doctor  What is it she does now? Look, how she rubs her hands. 
 Gentlewoman  It is an accustomed action with her, to seem thus 
 washing her hands: I have known her continue in 
 this a quarter of an hour. 
 LADY MACBETH  Yet here's a spot. 
 Doctor  Hark! she speaks: I will set down what comes from 
 her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly. 
 LADY MACBETH  Out, damned spot! out, I say!--One: two: why, 
 then, 'tis time to do't.--Hell is murky!--Fie, my 
 lord, fie! a soldier, and afeard? What need we 
 fear who knows it, when none can call our power to 
 account?--Yet who would have thought the old man 
 to have had so much blood in him. 
 Doctor  Do you mark that? 
 LADY MACBETH  The thane of Fife had a wife: where is she now?-- 
 What, will these hands ne'er be clean?--No more o' 
 that, my lord, no more o' that: you mar all with 
 this starting. 
 Doctor  Go to, go to; you have known what you should not. 
 Gentlewoman  She has spoke what she should not, I am sure of 
 that: heaven knows what she has known. 
 LADY MACBETH  Here's the smell of the blood still: all the 
 perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little 
 hand. Oh, oh, oh! 
 Doctor  What a sigh is there! The heart is sorely charged. 
 Gentlewoman  I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the 
 dignity of the whole body. 
 Doctor  Well, well, well,-- 
 Gentlewoman  Pray God it be, sir. 
 Doctor  This disease is beyond my practise: yet I have known 
 those which have walked in their sleep who have died 
 holily in their beds. 
 LADY MACBETH  Wash your hands, put on your nightgown; look not so 
 pale.--I tell you yet again, Banquo's buried; he 
 cannot come out on's grave. 
 Doctor  Even so? 
 LADY MACBETH  To bed, to bed! there's knocking at the gate: 
 come, come, come, come, give me your hand. What's 
 done cannot be undone.--To bed, to bed, to bed! 

 Exit  Doctor  Will she go now to bed? 
 Gentlewoman  Directly. 
 Doctor  Foul whisperings are abroad: unnatural deeds 
 Do breed unnatural troubles: infected minds 
 To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets: 
 More needs she the divine than the physician. 
 God, God forgive us all! Look after her; 
 Remove from her the means of all annoyance, 
 And still keep eyes upon her. So, good night: 
 My mind she has mated, and amazed my sight. 
 I think, but dare not speak. 
 Gentlewoman  Good night, good doctor. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Macbeth  | Act 5, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 