SCENE VI. Forres. The palace. The Tragedy of Macbeth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Macbeth  | Act 3, Scene 6 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE VI. Forres. The palace. 
 Enter LENNOX and another Lord  LENNOX  My former speeches have but hit your thoughts, 
 Which can interpret further: only, I say, 
 Things have been strangely borne. The 
 gracious Duncan 
 Was pitied of Macbeth: marry, he was dead: 
 And the right-valiant Banquo walk'd too late; 
 Whom, you may say, if't please you, Fleance kill'd, 
 For Fleance fled: men must not walk too late. 
 Who cannot want the thought how monstrous 
 It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain 
 To kill their gracious father? damned fact! 
 How it did grieve Macbeth! did he not straight 
 In pious rage the two delinquents tear, 
 That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep? 
 Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely too; 
 For 'twould have anger'd any heart alive 
 To hear the men deny't. So that, I say, 
 He has borne all things well: and I do think 
 That had he Duncan's sons under his key-- 
 As, an't please heaven, he shall not--they 
 should find 
 What 'twere to kill a father; so should Fleance. 
 But, peace! for from broad words and 'cause he fail'd 
 His presence at the tyrant's feast, I hear 
 Macduff lives in disgrace: sir, can you tell 
 Where he bestows himself? 
 Lord  The son of Duncan, 
 From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth 
 Lives in the English court, and is received 
 Of the most pious Edward with such grace 
 That the malevolence of fortune nothing 
 Takes from his high respect: thither Macduff 
 Is gone to pray the holy king, upon his aid 
 To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward: 
 That, by the help of these--with Him above 
 To ratify the work--we may again 
 Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights, 
 Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives, 
 Do faithful homage and receive free honours: 
 All which we pine for now: and this report 
 Hath so exasperate the king that he 
 Prepares for some attempt of war. 
 LENNOX  Sent he to Macduff? 
 Lord  He did: and with an absolute 'Sir, not I,' 
 The cloudy messenger turns me his back, 
 And hums, as who should say 'You'll rue the time 
 That clogs me with this answer.' 
 LENNOX  And that well might 
 Advise him to a caution, to hold what distance 
 His wisdom can provide. Some holy angel 
 Fly to the court of England and unfold 
 His message ere he come, that a swift blessing 
 May soon return to this our suffering country 
 Under a hand accursed! 
 Lord  I'll send my prayers with him. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Macbeth  | Act 3, Scene 6 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 