SCENE III. A monastery. Measure for Measure  Shakespeare homepage  |  Measure for Measure  | Act 1, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. A monastery. 
 Enter DUKE VINCENTIO and FRIAR THOMAS  DUKE VINCENTIO  No, holy father; throw away that thought; 
 Believe not that the dribbling dart of love 
 Can pierce a complete bosom. Why I desire thee 
 To give me secret harbour, hath a purpose 
 More grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends 
 Of burning youth. 
 FRIAR THOMAS  May your grace speak of it? 
 DUKE VINCENTIO  My holy sir, none better knows than you 
 How I have ever loved the life removed 
 And held in idle price to haunt assemblies 
 Where youth, and cost, and witless bravery keeps. 
 I have deliver'd to Lord Angelo, 
 A man of stricture and firm abstinence, 
 My absolute power and place here in Vienna, 
 And he supposes me travell'd to Poland; 
 For so I have strew'd it in the common ear, 
 And so it is received. Now, pious sir, 
 You will demand of me why I do this? 
 FRIAR THOMAS  Gladly, my lord. 
 DUKE VINCENTIO  We have strict statutes and most biting laws. 
 The needful bits and curbs to headstrong weeds, 
 Which for this nineteen years we have let slip; 
 Even like an o'ergrown lion in a cave, 
 That goes not out to prey. Now, as fond fathers, 
 Having bound up the threatening twigs of birch, 
 Only to stick it in their children's sight 
 For terror, not to use, in time the rod 
 Becomes more mock'd than fear'd; so our decrees, 
 Dead to infliction, to themselves are dead; 
 And liberty plucks justice by the nose; 
 The baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart 
 Goes all decorum. 
 FRIAR THOMAS  It rested in your grace 
 To unloose this tied-up justice when you pleased: 
 And it in you more dreadful would have seem'd 
 Than in Lord Angelo. 
 DUKE VINCENTIO  I do fear, too dreadful: 
 Sith 'twas my fault to give the people scope, 
 'Twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them 
 For what I bid them do: for we bid this be done, 
 When evil deeds have their permissive pass 
 And not the punishment. Therefore indeed, my father, 
 I have on Angelo imposed the office; 
 Who may, in the ambush of my name, strike home, 
 And yet my nature never in the fight 
 To do in slander. And to behold his sway, 
 I will, as 'twere a brother of your order, 
 Visit both prince and people: therefore, I prithee, 
 Supply me with the habit and instruct me 
 How I may formally in person bear me 
 Like a true friar. More reasons for this action 
 At our more leisure shall I render you; 
 Only, this one: Lord Angelo is precise; 
 Stands at a guard with envy; scarce confesses 
 That his blood flows, or that his appetite 
 Is more to bread than stone: hence shall we see, 
 If power change purpose, what our seemers be. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Measure for Measure  | Act 1, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 