SCENE I. The moated grange at ST. LUKE's. Measure for Measure  Shakespeare homepage  |  Measure for Measure  | Act 4, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. The moated grange at ST. LUKE's. 
 Enter MARIANA and a Boy 
 Boy sings  Take, O, take those lips away, 
 That so sweetly were forsworn; 
 And those eyes, the break of day, 
 Lights that do mislead the morn: 
 But my kisses bring again, bring again; 
 Seals of love, but sealed in vain, sealed in vain. 
 MARIANA  Break off thy song, and haste thee quick away: 
 Here comes a man of comfort, whose advice 
 Hath often still'd my brawling discontent. 

 Exit Boy 
 Enter DUKE VINCENTIO disguised as before  I cry you mercy, sir; and well could wish 
 You had not found me here so musical: 
 Let me excuse me, and believe me so, 
 My mirth it much displeased, but pleased my woe. 
 DUKE VINCENTIO  'Tis good; though music oft hath such a charm 
 To make bad good, and good provoke to harm. 
 I pray, you, tell me, hath any body inquired 
 for me here to-day? much upon this time have 
 I promised here to meet. 
 MARIANA  You have not been inquired after: 
 I have sat here all day. 

 Enter ISABELLA  DUKE VINCENTIO  I do constantly believe you. The time is come even 
 now. I shall crave your forbearance a little: may 
 be I will call upon you anon, for some advantage to yourself. 
 MARIANA  I am always bound to you. 

 Exit  DUKE VINCENTIO  Very well met, and well come. 
 What is the news from this good deputy? 
 ISABELLA  He hath a garden circummured with brick, 
 Whose western side is with a vineyard back'd; 
 And to that vineyard is a planched gate, 
 That makes his opening with this bigger key: 
 This other doth command a little door 
 Which from the vineyard to the garden leads; 
 There have I made my promise 
 Upon the heavy middle of the night 
 To call upon him. 
 DUKE VINCENTIO  But shall you on your knowledge find this way? 
 ISABELLA  I have ta'en a due and wary note upon't: 
 With whispering and most guilty diligence, 
 In action all of precept, he did show me 
 The way twice o'er. 
 DUKE VINCENTIO  Are there no other tokens 
 Between you 'greed concerning her observance? 
 ISABELLA  No, none, but only a repair i' the dark; 
 And that I have possess'd him my most stay 
 Can be but brief; for I have made him know 
 I have a servant comes with me along, 
 That stays upon me, whose persuasion is 
 I come about my brother. 
 DUKE VINCENTIO  'Tis well borne up. 
 I have not yet made known to Mariana 
 A word of this. What, ho! within! come forth! 

 Re-enter MARIANA  I pray you, be acquainted with this maid; 
 She comes to do you good. 
 ISABELLA  I do desire the like. 
 DUKE VINCENTIO  Do you persuade yourself that I respect you? 
 MARIANA  Good friar, I know you do, and have found it. 
 DUKE VINCENTIO  Take, then, this your companion by the hand, 
 Who hath a story ready for your ear. 
 I shall attend your leisure: but make haste; 
 The vaporous night approaches. 
 MARIANA  Will't please you walk aside? 

 Exeunt MARIANA and ISABELLA  DUKE VINCENTIO  O place and greatness! millions of false eyes 
 Are stuck upon thee: volumes of report 
 Run with these false and most contrarious quests 
 Upon thy doings: thousand escapes of wit 
 Make thee the father of their idle dreams 
 And rack thee in their fancies. 

 Re-enter MARIANA and ISABELLA  Welcome, how agreed? 
 ISABELLA  She'll take the enterprise upon her, father, 
 If you advise it. 
 DUKE VINCENTIO  It is not my consent, 
 But my entreaty too. 
 ISABELLA  Little have you to say 
 When you depart from him, but, soft and low, 
 'Remember now my brother.' 
 MARIANA  Fear me not. 
 DUKE VINCENTIO  Nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all. 
 He is your husband on a pre-contract: 
 To bring you thus together, 'tis no sin, 
 Sith that the justice of your title to him 
 Doth flourish the deceit. Come, let us go: 
 Our corn's to reap, for yet our tithe's to sow. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Measure for Measure  | Act 4, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 