SCENE IV. Belmont. A room in PORTIA'S house. The Merchant of Venice  Shakespeare homepage  |  Merchant of Venice  | Act 3, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE IV. Belmont. A room in PORTIA'S house. 
 Enter PORTIA, NERISSA, LORENZO, JESSICA, and BALTHASAR  LORENZO  Madam, although I speak it in your presence, 
 You have a noble and a true conceit 
 Of godlike amity; which appears most strongly 
 In bearing thus the absence of your lord. 
 But if you  knew to whom you show this honour, 
 How true a gentleman you send relief, 
 How dear a lover of my lord your husband, 
 I know you would be prouder of the work 
 Than customary bounty can enforce you. 
 PORTIA  I never did repent for doing good, 
 Nor shall not now: for in companions 
 That do converse and waste the time together, 
 Whose souls do bear an equal yoke Of love, 
 There must be needs a like proportion 
 Of lineaments, of manners and of spirit; 
 Which makes me think that this Antonio, 
 Being the bosom lover of my lord, 
 Must needs be like my lord. If it be so, 
 How little is the cost I have bestow'd 
 In purchasing the semblance of my soul 
 From out the state of hellish misery! 
 This comes too near the praising of myself; 
 Therefore no more of it: hear other things. 
 Lorenzo, I commit into your hands 
 The husbandry and manage of my house 
 Until my lord's return: for mine own part, 
 I have toward heaven breathed a secret vow 
 To live in prayer and contemplation, 
 Only attended by Nerissa here, 
 Until her husband and my lord's return: 
 There is a monastery two miles off; 
 And there will we abide. I do desire you 
 Not to deny this imposition; 
 The which my love and some necessity 
 Now lays upon you. 
 LORENZO  Madam, with all my heart; 
 I shall obey you in all fair commands. 
 PORTIA  My people do already know my mind, 
 And will acknowledge you and Jessica 
 In place of Lord Bassanio and myself. 
 And so farewell, till we shall meet again. 
 LORENZO  Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you! 
 JESSICA  I wish your ladyship all heart's content. 
 PORTIA  I thank you for your wish, and am well pleased 
 To wish it back on you: fare you well Jessica. 

 Exeunt JESSICA and LORENZO  Now, Balthasar, 
 As I have ever found thee honest-true, 
 So let me find thee still. Take this same letter, 
 And use thou all the endeavour of a man 
 In speed to Padua: see thou render this 
 Into my cousin's hand, Doctor Bellario; 
 And, look, what notes and garments he doth give thee, 
 Bring them, I pray thee, with imagined speed 
 Unto the tranect, to the common ferry 
 Which trades to Venice. Waste no time in words, 
 But get thee gone: I shall be there before thee. 
 BALTHASAR  Madam, I go with all convenient speed. 

 Exit  PORTIA  Come on, Nerissa; I have work in hand 
 That you yet know not of: we'll see our husbands 
 Before they think of us. 
 NERISSA  Shall they see us? 
 PORTIA  They shall, Nerissa; but in such a habit, 
 That they shall think we are accomplished 
 With that we lack. I'll hold thee any wager, 
 When we are both accoutred like young men, 
 I'll prove the prettier fellow of the two, 
 And wear my dagger with the braver grace, 
 And speak between the change of man and boy 
 With a reed voice, and turn two mincing steps 
 Into a manly stride, and speak of frays 
 Like a fine bragging youth, and tell quaint lies, 
 How honourable ladies sought my love, 
 Which I denying, they fell sick and died; 
 I could not do withal; then I'll repent, 
 And wish for all that, that I had not killed them; 
 And twenty of these puny lies I'll tell, 
 That men shall swear I have discontinued school 
 Above a twelvemonth. I have within my mind 
 A thousand raw tricks of these bragging Jacks, 
 Which I will practise. 
 NERISSA  Why, shall we turn to men? 
 PORTIA  Fie, what a question's that, 
 If thou wert near a lewd interpreter! 
 But come, I'll tell thee all my whole device 
 When I am in my coach, which stays for us 
 At the park gate; and therefore haste away, 
 For we must measure twenty miles to-day. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Merchant of Venice  | Act 3, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 