SCENE III. Venice. A public place. The Merchant of Venice  Shakespeare homepage  |  Merchant of Venice  | Act 1, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. Venice. A public place. 
 Enter BASSANIO and SHYLOCK  SHYLOCK  Three thousand ducats; well. 
 BASSANIO  Ay, sir, for three months. 
 SHYLOCK  For three months; well. 
 BASSANIO  For the which, as I told you, Antonio shall be bound. 
 SHYLOCK  Antonio shall become bound; well. 
 BASSANIO  May you stead me? will you pleasure me? shall I 
 know your answer? 
 SHYLOCK  Three thousand ducats for three months and Antonio bound. 
 BASSANIO  Your answer to that. 
 SHYLOCK  Antonio is a good man. 
 BASSANIO  Have you heard any imputation to the contrary? 
 SHYLOCK  Oh, no, no, no, no: my meaning in saying he is a 
 good man is to have you understand me that he is 
 sufficient. Yet his means are in supposition: he 
 hath an argosy bound to Tripolis, another to the 
 Indies; I understand moreover, upon the Rialto, he 
 hath a third at Mexico, a fourth for England, and 
 other ventures he hath, squandered abroad. But ships 
 are but boards, sailors but men: there be land-rats 
 and water-rats, water-thieves and land-thieves, I 
 mean pirates, and then there is the peril of waters, 
 winds and rocks. The man is, notwithstanding, 
 sufficient. Three thousand ducats; I think I may 
 take his bond. 
 BASSANIO  Be assured you may. 
 SHYLOCK  I will be assured I may; and, that I may be assured, 
 I will bethink me. May I speak with Antonio? 
 BASSANIO  If it please you to dine with us. 
 SHYLOCK  Yes, to smell pork; to eat of the habitation which 
 your prophet the Nazarite conjured the devil into. I 
 will buy with you, sell with you, talk with you, 
 walk with you, and so following, but I will not eat 
 with you, drink with you, nor pray with you. What 
 news on the Rialto? Who is he comes here? 

 Enter ANTONIO  BASSANIO  This is Signior Antonio. 
 SHYLOCK  [Aside]  How like a fawning publican he looks! 
 I hate him for he is a Christian, 
 But more for that in low simplicity 
 He lends out money gratis and brings down 
 The rate of usance here with us in Venice. 
 If I can catch him once upon the hip, 
 I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him. 
 He hates our sacred nation, and he rails, 
 Even there where merchants most do congregate, 
 On me, my bargains and my well-won thrift, 
 Which he calls interest. Cursed be my tribe, 
 If I forgive him! 
 BASSANIO  Shylock, do you hear? 
 SHYLOCK  I am debating of my present store, 
 And, by the near guess of my memory, 
 I cannot instantly raise up the gross 
 Of full three thousand ducats. What of that? 
 Tubal, a wealthy Hebrew of my tribe, 
 Will furnish me. But soft! how many months 
 Do you desire? 

 To ANTONIO  Rest you fair, good signior; 
 Your worship was the last man in our mouths. 
 ANTONIO  Shylock, although I neither lend nor borrow 
 By taking nor by giving of excess, 
 Yet, to supply the ripe wants of my friend, 
 I'll break a custom. Is he yet possess'd 
 How much ye would? 
 SHYLOCK  Ay, ay, three thousand ducats. 
 ANTONIO  And for three months. 
 SHYLOCK  I had forgot; three months; you told me so. 
 Well then, your bond; and let me see; but hear you; 
 Methought you said you neither lend nor borrow 
 Upon advantage. 
 ANTONIO  I do never use it. 
 SHYLOCK  When Jacob grazed his uncle Laban's sheep-- 
 This Jacob from our holy Abram was, 
 As his wise mother wrought in his behalf, 
 The third possessor; ay, he was the third-- 
 ANTONIO  And what of him? did he take interest? 
 SHYLOCK  No, not take interest, not, as you would say, 
 Directly interest: mark what Jacob did. 
 When Laban and himself were compromised 
 That all the eanlings which were streak'd and pied 
 Should fall as Jacob's hire, the ewes, being rank, 
 In the end of autumn turned to the rams, 
 And, when the work of generation was 
 Between these woolly breeders in the act, 
 The skilful shepherd peel'd me certain wands, 
 And, in the doing of the deed of kind, 
 He stuck them up before the fulsome ewes, 
 Who then conceiving did in eaning time 
 Fall parti-colour'd lambs, and those were Jacob's. 
 This was a way to thrive, and he was blest: 
 And thrift is blessing, if men steal it not. 
 ANTONIO  This was a venture, sir, that Jacob served for; 
 A thing not in his power to bring to pass, 
 But sway'd and fashion'd by the hand of heaven. 
 Was this inserted to make interest good? 
 Or is your gold and silver ewes and rams? 
 SHYLOCK  I cannot tell; I make it breed as fast: 
 But note me, signior. 
 ANTONIO  Mark you this, Bassanio, 
 The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose. 
 An evil soul producing holy witness 
 Is like a villain with a smiling cheek, 
 A goodly apple rotten at the heart: 
 O, what a goodly outside falsehood hath! 
 SHYLOCK  Three thousand ducats; 'tis a good round sum. 
 Three months from twelve; then, let me see; the rate-- 
 ANTONIO  Well, Shylock, shall we be beholding to you? 
 SHYLOCK  Signior Antonio, many a time and oft 
 In the Rialto you have rated me 
 About my moneys and my usances: 
 Still have I borne it with a patient shrug, 
 For sufferance is the badge of all our tribe. 
 You call me misbeliever, cut-throat dog, 
 And spit upon my Jewish gaberdine, 
 And all for use of that which is mine own. 
 Well then, it now appears you need my help: 
 Go to, then; you come to me, and you say 
 'Shylock, we would have moneys:' you say so; 
 You, that did void your rheum upon my beard 
 And foot me as you spurn a stranger cur 
 Over your threshold: moneys is your suit 
 What should I say to you? Should I not say 
 'Hath a dog money? is it possible 
 A cur can lend three thousand ducats?' Or 
 Shall I bend low and in a bondman's key, 
 With bated breath and whispering humbleness, Say this; 
 'Fair sir, you spit on me on Wednesday last; 
 You spurn'd me such a day; another time 
 You call'd me dog; and for these courtesies 
 I'll lend you thus much moneys'? 
 ANTONIO  I am as like to call thee so again, 
 To spit on thee again, to spurn thee too. 
 If thou wilt lend this money, lend it not 
 As to thy friends; for when did friendship take 
 A breed for barren metal of his friend? 
 But lend it rather to thine enemy, 
 Who, if he break, thou mayst with better face 
 Exact the penalty. 
 SHYLOCK  Why, look you, how you storm! 
 I would be friends with you and have your love, 
 Forget the shames that you have stain'd me with, 
 Supply your present wants and take no doit 
 Of usance for my moneys, and you'll not hear me: 
 This is kind I offer. 
 BASSANIO  This were kindness. 
 SHYLOCK  This kindness will I show. 
 Go with me to a notary, seal me there 
 Your single bond; and, in a merry sport, 
 If you repay me not on such a day, 
 In such a place, such sum or sums as are 
 Express'd in the condition, let the forfeit 
 Be nominated for an equal pound 
 Of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken 
 In what part of your body pleaseth me. 
 ANTONIO  Content, i' faith: I'll seal to such a bond 
 And say there is much kindness in the Jew. 
 BASSANIO  You shall not seal to such a bond for me: 
 I'll rather dwell in my necessity. 
 ANTONIO  Why, fear not, man; I will not forfeit it: 
 Within these two months, that's a month before 
 This bond expires, I do expect return 
 Of thrice three times the value of this bond. 
 SHYLOCK  O father Abram, what these Christians are, 
 Whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect 
 The thoughts of others! Pray you, tell me this; 
 If he should break his day, what should I gain 
 By the exaction of the forfeiture? 
 A pound of man's flesh taken from a man 
 Is not so estimable, profitable neither, 
 As flesh of muttons, beefs, or goats. I say, 
 To buy his favour, I extend this friendship: 
 If he will take it, so; if not, adieu; 
 And, for my love, I pray you wrong me not. 
 ANTONIO  Yes Shylock, I will seal unto this bond. 
 SHYLOCK  Then meet me forthwith at the notary's; 
 Give him direction for this merry bond, 
 And I will go and purse the ducats straight, 
 See to my house, left in the fearful guard 
 Of an unthrifty knave, and presently 
 I will be with you. 
 ANTONIO  Hie thee, gentle Jew. 

 Exit Shylock  The Hebrew will turn Christian: he grows kind. 
 BASSANIO  I like not fair terms and a villain's mind. 
 ANTONIO  Come on: in this there can be no dismay; 
 My ships come home a month before the day. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Merchant of Venice  | Act 1, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 