SCENE III. Venice. A street. The Merchant of Venice  Shakespeare homepage  |  Merchant of Venice  | Act 3, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. Venice. A street. 
 Enter SHYLOCK, SALARINO, ANTONIO, and Gaoler  SHYLOCK  Gaoler, look to him: tell not me of mercy; 
 This is the fool that lent out money gratis: 
 Gaoler, look to him. 
 ANTONIO  Hear me yet, good Shylock. 
 SHYLOCK  I'll have my bond; speak not against my bond: 
 I have sworn an oath that I will have my bond. 
 Thou call'dst me dog before thou hadst a cause; 
 But, since I am a dog, beware my fangs: 
 The duke shall grant me justice. I do wonder, 
 Thou naughty gaoler, that thou art so fond 
 To come abroad with him at his request. 
 ANTONIO  I pray thee, hear me speak. 
 SHYLOCK  I'll have my bond; I will not hear thee speak: 
 I'll have my bond; and therefore speak no more. 
 I'll not be made a soft and dull-eyed fool, 
 To shake the head, relent, and sigh, and yield 
 To Christian intercessors. Follow not; 
 I'll have no speaking: I will have my bond. 

 Exit  SALARINO  It is the most impenetrable cur 
 That ever kept with men. 
 ANTONIO  Let him alone: 
 I'll follow him no more with bootless prayers. 
 He seeks my life; his reason well I know: 
 I oft deliver'd from his forfeitures 
 Many that have at times made moan to me; 
 Therefore he hates me. 
 SALARINO  I am sure the duke 
 Will never grant this forfeiture to hold. 
 ANTONIO  The duke cannot deny the course of law: 
 For the commodity that strangers have 
 With us in Venice, if it be denied, 
 Will much impeach the justice of his state; 
 Since that the trade and profit of the city 
 Consisteth of all nations. Therefore, go: 
 These griefs and losses have so bated me, 
 That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh 
 To-morrow to my bloody creditor. 
 Well, gaoler, on. Pray God, Bassanio come 
 To see me pay his debt, and then I care not! 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Merchant of Venice  | Act 3, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 