SCENE I. Belmont. A room in PORTIA'S house. The Merchant of Venice  Shakespeare homepage  |  Merchant of Venice  | Act 2, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. Belmont. A room in PORTIA'S house. 
 Flourish of cornets. Enter the PRINCE OF MOROCCO  and his train; PORTIA, NERISSA, and others attending  MOROCCO  Mislike me not for my complexion, 
 The shadow'd livery of the burnish'd sun, 
 To whom I am a neighbour and near bred. 
 Bring me the fairest creature northward born, 
 Where Phoebus' fire scarce thaws the icicles, 
 And let us make incision for your love, 
 To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine. 
 I tell thee, lady, this aspect of mine 
 Hath fear'd the valiant: by my love I swear 
 The best-regarded virgins of our clime 
 Have loved it too: I would not change this hue, 
 Except to steal your thoughts, my gentle queen. 
 PORTIA  In terms of choice I am not solely led 
 By nice direction of a maiden's eyes; 
 Besides, the lottery of my destiny 
 Bars me the right of voluntary choosing: 
 But if my father had not scanted me 
 And hedged me by his wit, to yield myself 
 His wife who wins me by that means I told you, 
 Yourself, renowned prince, then stood as fair 
 As any comer I have look'd on yet 
 For my affection. 
 MOROCCO  Even for that I thank you: 
 Therefore, I pray you, lead me to the caskets 
 To try my fortune. By this scimitar 
 That slew the Sophy and a Persian prince 
 That won three fields of Sultan Solyman, 
 I would outstare the sternest eyes that look, 
 Outbrave the heart most daring on the earth, 
 Pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear, 
 Yea, mock the lion when he roars for prey, 
 To win thee, lady. But, alas the while! 
 If Hercules and Lichas play at dice 
 Which is the better man, the greater throw 
 May turn by fortune from the weaker hand: 
 So is Alcides beaten by his page; 
 And so may I, blind fortune leading me, 
 Miss that which one unworthier may attain, 
 And die with grieving. 
 PORTIA  You must take your chance, 
 And either not attempt to choose at all 
 Or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong 
 Never to speak to lady afterward 
 In way of marriage: therefore be advised. 
 MOROCCO  Nor will not. Come, bring me unto my chance. 
 PORTIA  First, forward to the temple: after dinner 
 Your hazard shall be made. 
 MOROCCO  Good fortune then! 
 To make me blest or cursed'st among men. 

 Cornets, and exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Merchant of Venice  | Act 2, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 