SCENE II. A street. The Merry Wives of Windsor  Shakespeare homepage  |  Merry Wives of Windsor  | Act 3, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. A street. 
 Enter MISTRESS PAGE and ROBIN  MISTRESS PAGE  Nay, keep your way, little gallant; you were wont to 
 be a follower, but now you are a leader. Whether 
 had you rather lead mine eyes, or eye your master's heels? 
 ROBIN  I had rather, forsooth, go before you like a man 
 than follow him like a dwarf. 
 MISTRESS PAGE  O, you are a flattering boy: now I see you'll be a courtier. 

 Enter FORD  FORD  Well met, Mistress Page. Whither go you? 
 MISTRESS PAGE  Truly, sir, to see your wife. Is she at home? 
 FORD  Ay; and as idle as she may hang together, for want 
 of company. I think, if your husbands were dead, 
 you two would marry. 
 MISTRESS PAGE  Be sure of that,--two other husbands. 
 FORD  Where had you this pretty weather-cock? 
 MISTRESS PAGE  I cannot tell what the dickens his name is my 
 husband had him of. What do you call your knight's 
 name, sirrah? 
 ROBIN  Sir John Falstaff. 
 FORD  Sir John Falstaff! 
 MISTRESS PAGE  He, he; I can never hit on's name. There is such a 
 league between my good man and he! Is your wife at 
 home indeed? 
 FORD  Indeed she is. 
 MISTRESS PAGE  By your leave, sir: I am sick till I see her. 

 Exeunt MISTRESS PAGE and ROBIN  FORD  Has Page any brains? hath he any eyes? hath he any 
 thinking? Sure, they sleep; he hath no use of them. 
 Why, this boy will carry a letter twenty mile, as 
 easy as a cannon will shoot point-blank twelve 
 score. He pieces out his wife's inclination; he 
 gives her folly motion and advantage: and now she's 
 going to my wife, and Falstaff's boy with her. A 
 man may hear this shower sing in the wind. And 
 Falstaff's boy with her! Good plots, they are laid; 
 and our revolted wives share damnation together. 
 Well; I will take him, then torture my wife, pluck 
 the borrowed veil of modesty from the so seeming 
 Mistress Page, divulge Page himself for a secure and 
 wilful Actaeon; and to these violent proceedings all 
 my neighbours shall cry aim. 

 Clock heard  The clock gives me my cue, and my assurance bids me 
 search: there I shall find Falstaff: I shall be 
 rather praised for this than mocked; for it is as 
 positive as the earth is firm that Falstaff is 
 there: I will go. 

 Enter PAGE, SHALLOW, SLENDER, Host, SIR HUGH EVANS, DOCTOR CAIUS, and RUGBY  SHALLOW  PAGE  & C  Well met, Master Ford. 
 FORD  Trust me, a good knot: I have good cheer at home; 
 and I pray you all go with me. 
 SHALLOW  I must excuse myself, Master Ford. 
 SLENDER  And so must I, sir: we have appointed to dine with 
 Mistress Anne, and I would not break with her for 
 more money than I'll speak of. 
 SHALLOW  We have lingered about a match between Anne Page and 
 my cousin Slender, and this day we shall have our answer. 
 SLENDER  I hope I have your good will, father Page. 
 PAGE  You have, Master Slender; I stand wholly for you: 
 but my wife, master doctor, is for you altogether. 
 DOCTOR CAIUS  Ay, be-gar; and de maid is love-a me: my nursh-a 
 Quickly tell me so mush. 
 Host  What say you to young Master Fenton? he capers, he 
 dances, he has eyes of youth, he writes verses, he 
 speaks holiday, he smells April and May: he will 
 carry't, he will carry't; 'tis in his buttons; he 
 will carry't. 
 PAGE  Not by my consent, I promise you. The gentleman is 
 of no having: he kept company with the wild prince 
 and Poins; he is of too high a region; he knows too 
 much. No, he shall not knit a knot in his fortunes 
 with the finger of my substance: if he take her, 
 let him take her simply; the wealth I have waits on 
 my consent, and my consent goes not that way. 
 FORD  I beseech you heartily, some of you go home with me 
 to dinner: besides your cheer, you shall have 
 sport; I will show you a monster. Master doctor, 
 you shall go; so shall you, Master Page; and you, Sir Hugh. 
 SHALLOW  Well, fare you well: we shall have the freer wooing 
 at Master Page's. 

 Exeunt SHALLOW, and SLENDER  DOCTOR CAIUS  Go home, John Rugby; I come anon. 

 Exit RUGBY  Host  Farewell, my hearts: I will to my honest knight 
 Falstaff, and drink canary with him. 

 Exit  FORD  [Aside]  I think I shall drink in pipe wine first 
 with him; I'll make him dance. Will you go, gentles? 
 All  Have with you to see this monster. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Merry Wives of Windsor  | Act 3, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 