SCENE II. Another part of the wood. A Midsummer Night's Dream  Shakespeare homepage  |  Midsummer Night's Dream  | Act 2, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. Another part of the wood. 
 Enter TITANIA, with her train  TITANIA  Come, now a roundel and a fairy song; 
 Then, for the third part of a minute, hence; 
 Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds, 
 Some war with rere-mice for their leathern wings, 
 To make my small elves coats, and some keep back 
 The clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders 
 At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep; 
 Then to your offices and let me rest. 

 The Fairies sing  You spotted snakes with double tongue, 
 Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen; 
 Newts and blind-worms, do no wrong, 
 Come not near our fairy queen. 
 Philomel, with melody 
 Sing in our sweet lullaby; 
 Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby: 
 Never harm, 
 Nor spell nor charm, 
 Come our lovely lady nigh; 
 So, good night, with lullaby. 
 Weaving spiders, come not here; 
 Hence, you long-legg'd spinners, hence! 
 Beetles black, approach not near; 
 Worm nor snail, do no offence. 
 Philomel, with melody,  & c. 
 Fairy  Hence, away! now all is well: 
 One aloof stand sentinel. 

 Exeunt Fairies. TITANIA sleeps 
 Enter OBERON and squeezes the flower on TITANIA's eyelids  OBERON  What thou seest when thou dost wake, 
 Do it for thy true-love take, 
 Love and languish for his sake: 
 Be it ounce, or cat, or bear, 
 Pard, or boar with bristled hair, 
 In thy eye that shall appear 
 When thou wakest, it is thy dear: 
 Wake when some vile thing is near. 

 Exit 
 Enter LYSANDER and HERMIA  LYSANDER  Fair love, you faint with wandering in the wood; 
 And to speak troth, I have forgot our way: 
 We'll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good, 
 And tarry for the comfort of the day. 
 HERMIA  Be it so, Lysander: find you out a bed; 
 For I upon this bank will rest my head. 
 LYSANDER  One turf shall serve as pillow for us both; 
 One heart, one bed, two bosoms and one troth. 
 HERMIA  Nay, good Lysander; for my sake, my dear, 
 Lie further off yet, do not lie so near. 
 LYSANDER  O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence! 
 Love takes the meaning in love's conference. 
 I mean, that my heart unto yours is knit 
 So that but one heart we can make of it; 
 Two bosoms interchained with an oath; 
 So then two bosoms and a single troth. 
 Then by your side no bed-room me deny; 
 For lying so, Hermia, I do not lie. 
 HERMIA  Lysander riddles very prettily: 
 Now much beshrew my manners and my pride, 
 If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied. 
 But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy 
 Lie further off; in human modesty, 
 Such separation as may well be said 
 Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid, 
 So far be distant; and, good night, sweet friend: 
 Thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end! 
 LYSANDER  Amen, amen, to that fair prayer, say I; 
 And then end life when I end loyalty! 
 Here is my bed: sleep give thee all his rest! 
 HERMIA  With half that wish the wisher's eyes be press'd! 

 They sleep 
 Enter PUCK  PUCK  Through the forest have I gone. 
 But Athenian found I none, 
 On whose eyes I might approve 
 This flower's force in stirring love. 
 Night and silence.--Who is here? 
 Weeds of Athens he doth wear: 
 This is he, my master said, 
 Despised the Athenian maid; 
 And here the maiden, sleeping sound, 
 On the dank and dirty ground. 
 Pretty soul! she durst not lie 
 Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy. 
 Churl, upon thy eyes I throw 
 All the power this charm doth owe. 
 When thou wakest, let love forbid 
 Sleep his seat on thy eyelid: 
 So awake when I am gone; 
 For I must now to Oberon. 

 Exit 
 Enter DEMETRIUS and HELENA, running  HELENA  Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius. 
 DEMETRIUS  I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus. 
 HELENA  O, wilt thou darkling leave me? do not so. 
 DEMETRIUS  Stay, on thy peril: I alone will go. 

 Exit  HELENA  O, I am out of breath in this fond chase! 
 The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace. 
 Happy is Hermia, wheresoe'er she lies; 
 For she hath blessed and attractive eyes. 
 How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears: 
 If so, my eyes are oftener wash'd than hers. 
 No, no, I am as ugly as a bear; 
 For beasts that meet me run away for fear: 
 Therefore no marvel though Demetrius 
 Do, as a monster fly my presence thus. 
 What wicked and dissembling glass of mine 
 Made me compare with Hermia's sphery eyne? 
 But who is here? Lysander! on the ground! 
 Dead? or asleep? I see no blood, no wound. 
 Lysander if you live, good sir, awake. 
 LYSANDER  [Awaking]  And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake. 
 Transparent Helena! Nature shows art, 
 That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart. 
 Where is Demetrius? O, how fit a word 
 Is that vile name to perish on my sword! 
 HELENA  Do not say so, Lysander; say not so 
 What though he love your Hermia? Lord, what though? 
 Yet Hermia still loves you: then be content. 
 LYSANDER  Content with Hermia! No; I do repent 
 The tedious minutes I with her have spent. 
 Not Hermia but Helena I love: 
 Who will not change a raven for a dove? 
 The will of man is by his reason sway'd; 
 And reason says you are the worthier maid. 
 Things growing are not ripe until their season 
 So I, being young, till now ripe not to reason; 
 And touching now the point of human skill, 
 Reason becomes the marshal to my will 
 And leads me to your eyes, where I o'erlook 
 Love's stories written in love's richest book. 
 HELENA  Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born? 
 When at your hands did I deserve this scorn? 
 Is't not enough, is't not enough, young man, 
 That I did never, no, nor never can, 
 Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius' eye, 
 But you must flout my insufficiency? 
 Good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do, 
 In such disdainful manner me to woo. 
 But fare you well: perforce I must confess 
 I thought you lord of more true gentleness. 
 O, that a lady, of one man refused. 
 Should of another therefore be abused! 

 Exit  LYSANDER  She sees not Hermia. Hermia, sleep thou there: 
 And never mayst thou come Lysander near! 
 For as a surfeit of the sweetest things 
 The deepest loathing to the stomach brings, 
 Or as tie heresies that men do leave 
 Are hated most of those they did deceive, 
 So thou, my surfeit and my heresy, 
 Of all be hated, but the most of me! 
 And, all my powers, address your love and might 
 To honour Helen and to be her knight! 

 Exit  HERMIA  [Awaking]  Help me, Lysander, help me! do thy best 
 To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast! 
 Ay me, for pity! what a dream was here! 
 Lysander, look how I do quake with fear: 
 Methought a serpent eat my heart away, 
 And you sat smiling at his cruel pray. 
 Lysander! what, removed? Lysander! lord! 
 What, out of hearing? gone? no sound, no word? 
 Alack, where are you speak, an if you hear; 
 Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear. 
 No? then I well perceive you all not nigh 
 Either death or you I'll find immediately. 

 Exit  Shakespeare homepage  |  Midsummer Night's Dream  | Act 2, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 