SCENE II. Athens. QUINCE'S house. A Midsummer Night's Dream  Shakespeare homepage  |  Midsummer Night's Dream  | Act 4, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. Athens. QUINCE'S house. 
 Enter QUINCE, FLUTE, SNOUT, and STARVELING  QUINCE  Have you sent to Bottom's house ? is he come home yet? 
 STARVELING  He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt he is 
 transported. 
 FLUTE  If he come not, then the play is marred: it goes 
 not forward, doth it? 
 QUINCE  It is not possible: you have not a man in all 
 Athens able to discharge Pyramus but he. 
 FLUTE  No, he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft 
 man in Athens. 
 QUINCE  Yea and the best person too; and he is a very 
 paramour for a sweet voice. 
 FLUTE  You must say 'paragon:' a paramour is, God bless us, 
 a thing of naught. 

 Enter SNUG  SNUG  Masters, the duke is coming from the temple, and 
 there is two or three lords and ladies more married: 
 if our sport had gone forward, we had all been made 
 men. 
 FLUTE  O sweet bully Bottom! Thus hath he lost sixpence a 
 day during his life; he could not have 'scaped 
 sixpence a day: an the duke had not given him 
 sixpence a day for playing Pyramus, I'll be hanged; 
 he would have deserved it: sixpence a day in 
 Pyramus, or nothing. 

 Enter BOTTOM  BOTTOM  Where are these lads? where are these hearts? 
 QUINCE  Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy hour! 
 BOTTOM  Masters, I am to discourse wonders: but ask me not 
 what; for if I tell you, I am no true Athenian. I 
 will tell you every thing, right as it fell out. 
 QUINCE  Let us hear, sweet Bottom. 
 BOTTOM  Not a word of me. All that I will tell you is, that 
 the duke hath dined. Get your apparel together, 
 good strings to your beards, new ribbons to your 
 pumps; meet presently at the palace; every man look 
 o'er his part; for the short and the long is, our 
 play is preferred. In any case, let Thisby have 
 clean linen; and let not him that plays the lion 
 pair his nails, for they shall hang out for the 
 lion's claws. And, most dear actors, eat no onions 
 nor garlic, for we are to utter sweet breath; and I 
 do not doubt but to hear them say, it is a sweet 
 comedy. No more words: away! go, away! 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Midsummer Night's Dream  | Act 4, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 