SCENE V. Another room in LEONATO'S house. Much Ado About Nothing  Shakespeare homepage  |  Much Ado About Nothing  | Act 3, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE V. Another room in LEONATO'S house. 
 Enter LEONATO, with DOGBERRY and VERGES  LEONATO  What would you with me, honest neighbour? 
 DOGBERRY  Marry, sir, I would have some confidence with you 
 that decerns you nearly. 
 LEONATO  Brief, I pray you; for you see it is a busy time with me. 
 DOGBERRY  Marry, this it is, sir. 
 VERGES  Yes, in truth it is, sir. 
 LEONATO  What is it, my good friends? 
 DOGBERRY  Goodman Verges, sir, speaks a little off the 
 matter: an old man, sir, and his wits are not so 
 blunt as, God help, I would desire they were; but, 
 in faith, honest as the skin between his brows. 
 VERGES  Yes, I thank God I am as honest as any man living 
 that is an old man and no honester than I. 
 DOGBERRY  Comparisons are odorous: palabras, neighbour Verges. 
 LEONATO  Neighbours, you are tedious. 
 DOGBERRY  It pleases your worship to say so, but we are the 
 poor duke's officers; but truly, for mine own part, 
 if I were as tedious as a king, I could find it in 
 my heart to bestow it all of your worship. 
 LEONATO  All thy tediousness on me, ah? 
 DOGBERRY  Yea, an 'twere a thousand pound more than 'tis; for 
 I hear as good exclamation on your worship as of any 
 man in the city; and though I be but a poor man, I 
 am glad to hear it. 
 VERGES  And so am I. 
 LEONATO  I would fain know what you have to say. 
 VERGES  Marry, sir, our watch to-night, excepting your 
 worship's presence, ha' ta'en a couple of as arrant 
 knaves as any in Messina. 
 DOGBERRY  A good old man, sir; he will be talking: as they 
 say, when the age is in, the wit is out: God help 
 us! it is a world to see. Well said, i' faith, 
 neighbour Verges: well, God's a good man; an two men 
 ride of a horse, one must ride behind. An honest 
 soul, i' faith, sir; by my troth he is, as ever 
 broke bread; but God is to be worshipped; all men 
 are not alike; alas, good neighbour! 
 LEONATO  Indeed, neighbour, he comes too short of you. 
 DOGBERRY  Gifts that God gives. 
 LEONATO  I must leave you. 
 DOGBERRY  One word, sir: our watch, sir, have indeed 
 comprehended two aspicious persons, and we would 
 have them this morning examined before your worship. 
 LEONATO  Take their examination yourself and bring it me: I 
 am now in great haste, as it may appear unto you. 
 DOGBERRY  It shall be suffigance. 
 LEONATO  Drink some wine ere you go: fare you well. 

 Enter a Messenger  Messenger  My lord, they stay for you to give your daughter to 
 her husband. 
 LEONATO  I'll wait upon them: I am ready. 

 Exeunt LEONATO and Messenger  DOGBERRY  Go, good partner, go, get you to Francis Seacole; 
 bid him bring his pen and inkhorn to the gaol: we 
 are now to examination these men. 
 VERGES  And we must do it wisely. 
 DOGBERRY  We will spare for no wit, I warrant you; here's 
 that shall drive some of them to a non-come: only 
 get the learned writer to set down our 
 excommunication and meet me at the gaol. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Much Ado About Nothing  | Act 3, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 