SCENE II. Another street. Othello, the Moore of Venice  Shakespeare homepage  |  Othello  | Act 1, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. Another street. 
 Enter OTHELLO, IAGO, and Attendants with torches  IAGO  Though in the trade of war I have slain men, 
 Yet do I hold it very stuff o' the conscience 
 To do no contrived murder: I lack iniquity 
 Sometimes to do me service: nine or ten times 
 I had thought to have yerk'd him here under the ribs. 
 OTHELLO  'Tis better as it is. 
 IAGO  Nay, but he prated, 
 And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms 
 Against your honour 
 That, with the little godliness I have, 
 I did full hard forbear him. But, I pray you, sir, 
 Are you fast married? Be assured of this, 
 That the magnifico is much beloved, 
 And hath in his effect a voice potential 
 As double as the duke's: he will divorce you; 
 Or put upon you what restraint and grievance 
 The law, with all his might to enforce it on, 
 Will give him cable. 
 OTHELLO  Let him do his spite: 
 My services which I have done the signiory 
 Shall out-tongue his complaints. 'Tis yet to know,-- 
 Which, when I know that boasting is an honour, 
 I shall promulgate--I fetch my life and being 
 From men of royal siege, and my demerits 
 May speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune 
 As this that I have reach'd: for know, Iago, 
 But that I love the gentle Desdemona, 
 I would not my unhoused free condition 
 Put into circumscription and confine 
 For the sea's worth. But, look! what lights come yond? 
 IAGO  Those are the raised father and his friends: 
 You were best go in. 
 OTHELLO  Not I	I must be found: 
 My parts, my title and my perfect soul 
 Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they? 
 IAGO  By Janus, I think no. 

 Enter CASSIO, and certain Officers with torches  OTHELLO  The servants of the duke, and my lieutenant. 
 The goodness of the night upon you, friends! 
 What is the news? 
 CASSIO  The duke does greet you, general, 
 And he requires your haste-post-haste appearance, 
 Even on the instant. 
 OTHELLO  What is the matter, think you? 
 CASSIO  Something from Cyprus as I may divine: 
 It is a business of some heat: the galleys 
 Have sent a dozen sequent messengers 
 This very night at one another's heels, 
 And many of the consuls, raised and met, 
 Are at the duke's already: you have been 
 hotly call'd for; 
 When, being not at your lodging to be found, 
 The senate hath sent about three several guests 
 To search you out. 
 OTHELLO  'Tis well I am found by you. 
 I will but spend a word here in the house, 
 And go with you. 

 Exit  CASSIO  Ancient, what makes he here? 
 IAGO  'Faith, he to-night hath boarded a land carack: 
 If it prove lawful prize, he's made for ever. 
 CASSIO  I do not understand. 
 IAGO  He's married. 
 CASSIO  To who? 

 Re-enter OTHELLO  IAGO  Marry, to--Come, captain, will you go? 
 OTHELLO  Have with you. 
 CASSIO  Here comes another troop to seek for you. 
 IAGO  It is Brabantio. General, be advised; 
 He comes to bad intent. 

 Enter BRABANTIO, RODERIGO, and Officers with torches and weapons  OTHELLO  Holla! stand there! 
 RODERIGO  Signior, it is the Moor. 
 BRABANTIO  Down with him, thief! 

 They draw on both sides  IAGO  You, Roderigo! come, sir, I am for you. 
 OTHELLO  Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them. 
 Good signior, you shall more command with years 
 Than with your weapons. 
 BRABANTIO  O thou foul thief, where hast thou stow'd my daughter? 
 Damn'd as thou art, thou hast enchanted her; 
 For I'll refer me to all things of sense, 
 If she in chains of magic were not bound, 
 Whether a maid so tender, fair and happy, 
 So opposite to marriage that she shunned 
 The wealthy curled darlings of our nation, 
 Would ever have, to incur a general mock, 
 Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom 
 Of such a thing as thou, to fear, not to delight. 
 Judge me the world, if 'tis not gross in sense 
 That thou hast practised on her with foul charms, 
 Abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals 
 That weaken motion: I'll have't disputed on; 
 'Tis probable and palpable to thinking. 
 I therefore apprehend and do attach thee 
 For an abuser of the world, a practiser 
 Of arts inhibited and out of warrant. 
 Lay hold upon him: if he do resist, 
 Subdue him at his peril. 
 OTHELLO  Hold your hands, 
 Both you of my inclining, and the rest: 
 Were it my cue to fight, I should have known it 
 Without a prompter. Where will you that I go 
 To answer this your charge? 
 BRABANTIO  To prison, till fit time 
 Of law and course of direct session 
 Call thee to answer. 
 OTHELLO  What if I do obey? 
 How may the duke be therewith satisfied, 
 Whose messengers are here about my side, 
 Upon some present business of the state 
 To bring me to him? 
 First Officer  'Tis true, most worthy signior; 
 The duke's in council and your noble self, 
 I am sure, is sent for. 
 BRABANTIO  How! the duke in council! 
 In this time of the night! Bring him away: 
 Mine's not an idle cause: the duke himself, 
 Or any of my brothers of the state, 
 Cannot but feel this wrong as 'twere their own; 
 For if such actions may have passage free, 
 Bond-slaves and pagans shall our statesmen be. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Othello  | Act 1, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 