SCENE III. Tyre. An ante-chamber in the palace. Pericles, Prince of Tyre  Shakespeare homepage  |  Pericles  | Act 1, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. Tyre. An ante-chamber in the palace. 
 Enter THALIARD  THALIARD  So, this is Tyre, and this the court. Here must I 
 kill King Pericles; and if I do it not, I am sure to 
 be hanged at home: 'tis dangerous. Well, I perceive 
 he was a wise fellow, and had good discretion, that, 
 being bid to ask what he would of the king, desired 
 he might know none of his secrets: now do I see he 
 had some reason for't; for if a king bid a man be a 
 villain, he's bound by the indenture of his oath to 
 be one! Hush! here come the lords of Tyre. 

 Enter HELICANUS and ESCANES, with other Lords of Tyre  HELICANUS  You shall not need, my fellow peers of Tyre, 
 Further to question me of your king's departure: 
 His seal'd commission, left in trust with me, 
 Doth speak sufficiently he's gone to travel. 
 THALIARD  [Aside]  How! the king gone! 
 HELICANUS  If further yet you will be satisfied, 
 Why, as it were unlicensed of your loves, 
 He would depart, I'll give some light unto you. 
 Being at Antioch-- 
 THALIARD  [Aside]          What from Antioch? 
 HELICANUS  Royal Antiochus--on what cause I know not-- 
 Took some displeasure at him; at least he judged so: 
 And doubting lest that he had err'd or sinn'd, 
 To show his sorrow, he'ld correct himself; 
 So puts himself unto the shipman's toil, 
 With whom each minute threatens life or death. 
 THALIARD  [Aside]  Well, I perceive 
 I shall not be hang'd now, although I would; 
 But since he's gone, the king's seas must please: 
 He 'scaped the land, to perish at the sea. 
 I'll present myself. Peace to the lords of Tyre! 
 HELICANUS  Lord Thaliard from Antiochus is welcome. 
 THALIARD  From him I come 
 With message unto princely Pericles; 
 But since my landing I have understood 
 Your lord has betook himself to unknown travels, 
 My message must return from whence it came. 
 HELICANUS  We have no reason to desire it, 
 Commended to our master, not to us: 
 Yet, ere you shall depart, this we desire, 
 As friends to Antioch, we may feast in Tyre. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Pericles  | Act 1, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 