SCENE II. Mytilene. A room in a brothel. Pericles, Prince of Tyre  Shakespeare homepage  |  Pericles  | Act 4, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. Mytilene. A room in a brothel. 
 Enter Pandar, Bawd, and BOULT  Pandar  Boult! 
 BOULT  Sir? 
 Pandar  Search the market narrowly; Mytilene is full of 
 gallants. We lost too much money this mart by being 
 too wenchless. 
 Bawd  We were never so much out of creatures. We have but 
 poor three, and they can do no more than they can 
 do; and they with continual action are even as good as rotten. 
 Pandar  Therefore let's have fresh ones, whate'er we pay for 
 them. If there be not a conscience to be used in 
 every trade, we shall never prosper. 
 Bawd  Thou sayest true: 'tis not our bringing up of poor 
 bastards,--as, I think, I have brought up some eleven-- 
 BOULT  Ay, to eleven; and brought them down again. But 
 shall I search the market? 
 Bawd  What else, man? The stuff we have, a strong wind 
 will blow it to pieces, they are so pitifully sodden. 
 Pandar  Thou sayest true; they're too unwholesome, o' 
 conscience. The poor Transylvanian is dead, that 
 lay with the little baggage. 
 BOULT  Ay, she quickly pooped him; she made him roast-meat 
 for worms. But I'll go search the market. 

 Exit  Pandar  Three or four thousand chequins were as pretty a 
 proportion to live quietly, and so give over. 
 Bawd  Why to give over, I pray you? is it a shame to get 
 when we are old? 
 Pandar  O, our credit comes not in like the commodity, nor 
 the commodity wages not with the danger: therefore, 
 if in our youths we could pick up some pretty 
 estate, 'twere not amiss to keep our door hatched. 
 Besides, the sore terms we stand upon with the gods 
 will be strong with us for giving over. 
 Bawd  Come, other sorts offend as well as we. 
 Pandar  As well as we! ay, and better too; we offend worse. 
 Neither is our profession any trade; it's no 
 calling. But here comes Boult. 

 Re-enter BOULT, with the Pirates and MARINA  BOULT  [To MARINA]  Come your ways. My masters, you say 
 she's a virgin? 
 First Pirate  O, sir, we doubt it not. 
 BOULT  Master, I have gone through for this piece, you see: 
 if you like her, so; if not, I have lost my earnest. 
 Bawd  Boult, has she any qualities? 
 BOULT  She has a good face, speaks well, and has excellent 
 good clothes: there's no further necessity of 
 qualities can make her be refused. 
 Bawd  What's her price, Boult? 
 BOULT  I cannot be bated one doit of a thousand pieces. 
 Pandar  Well, follow me, my masters, you shall have your 
 money presently. Wife, take her in; instruct her 
 what she has to do, that she may not be raw in her 
 entertainment. 

 Exeunt Pandar and Pirates  Bawd  Boult, take you the marks of her, the colour of her 
 hair, complexion, height, age, with warrant of her 
 virginity; and cry 'He that will give most shall 
 have her first.' Such a maidenhead were no cheap 
 thing, if men were as they have been. Get this done 
 as I command you. 
 BOULT  Performance shall follow. 

 Exit  MARINA  Alack that Leonine was so slack, so slow! 
 He should have struck, not spoke; or that these pirates, 
 Not enough barbarous, had not o'erboard thrown me 
 For to seek my mother! 
 Bawd  Why lament you, pretty one? 
 MARINA  That I am pretty. 
 Bawd  Come, the gods have done their part in you. 
 MARINA  I accuse them not. 
 Bawd  You are light into my hands, where you are like to live. 
 MARINA  The more my fault 
 To scape his hands where I was like to die. 
 Bawd  Ay, and you shall live in pleasure. 
 MARINA  No. 
 Bawd  Yes, indeed shall you, and taste gentlemen of all 
 fashions: you shall fare well; you shall have the 
 difference of all complexions. What! do you stop your ears? 
 MARINA  Are you a woman? 
 Bawd  What would you have me be, an I be not a woman? 
 MARINA  An honest woman, or not a woman. 
 Bawd  Marry, whip thee, gosling: I think I shall have 
 something to do with you. Come, you're a young 
 foolish sapling, and must be bowed as I would have 
 you. 
 MARINA  The gods defend me! 
 Bawd  If it please the gods to defend you by men, then men 
 must comfort you, men must feed you, men must stir 
 you up. Boult's returned. 

 Re-enter BOULT  Now, sir, hast thou cried her through the market? 
 BOULT  I have cried her almost to the number of her hairs; 
 I have drawn her picture with my voice. 
 Bawd  And I prithee tell me, how dost thou find the 
 inclination of the people, especially of the younger sort? 
 BOULT  'Faith, they listened to me as they would have 
 hearkened to their father's testament. There was a 
 Spaniard's mouth so watered, that he went to bed to 
 her very description. 
 Bawd  We shall have him here to-morrow with his best ruff on. 
 BOULT  To-night, to-night. But, mistress, do you know the 
 French knight that cowers i' the hams? 
 Bawd  Who, Monsieur Veroles? 
 BOULT  Ay, he: he offered to cut a caper at the 
 proclamation; but he made a groan at it, and swore 
 he would see her to-morrow. 
 Bawd  Well, well; as for him, he brought his disease 
 hither: here he does but repair it. I know he will 
 come in our shadow, to scatter his crowns in the 
 sun. 
 BOULT  Well, if we had of every nation a traveller, we 
 should lodge them with this sign. 
 Bawd  [To MARINA]  Pray you, come hither awhile. You 
 have fortunes coming upon you. Mark me: you must 
 seem to do that fearfully which you commit 
 willingly, despise profit where you have most gain. 
 To weep that you live as ye do makes pity in your 
 lovers: seldom but that pity begets you a good 
 opinion, and that opinion a mere profit. 
 MARINA  I understand you not. 
 BOULT  O, take her home, mistress, take her home: these 
 blushes of hers must be quenched with some present practise. 
 Bawd  Thou sayest true, i' faith, so they must; for your 
 bride goes to that with shame which is her way to go 
 with warrant. 
 BOULT  'Faith, some do, and some do not. But, mistress, if 
 I have bargained for the joint,-- 
 Bawd  Thou mayst cut a morsel off the spit. 
 BOULT  I may so. 
 Bawd  Who should deny it? Come, young one, I like the 
 manner of your garments well. 
 BOULT  Ay, by my faith, they shall not be changed yet. 
 Bawd  Boult, spend thou that in the town: report what a 
 sojourner we have; you'll lose nothing by custom. 
 When nature flamed this piece, she meant thee a good 
 turn; therefore say what a paragon she is, and thou 
 hast the harvest out of thine own report. 
 BOULT  I warrant you, mistress, thunder shall not so awake 
 the beds of eels as my giving out her beauty stir up 
 the lewdly-inclined. I'll bring home some to-night. 
 Bawd  Come your ways; follow me. 
 MARINA  If fires be hot, knives sharp, or waters deep, 
 Untied I still my virgin knot will keep. 
 Diana, aid my purpose! 
 Bawd  What have we to do with Diana? Pray you, will you go with us? 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Pericles  | Act 4, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 