SCENE I. Pentapolis. An open place by the sea-side. Pericles, Prince of Tyre  Shakespeare homepage  |  Pericles  | Act 2, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. Pentapolis. An open place by the sea-side. 
 Enter PERICLES, wet  PERICLES  Yet cease your ire, you angry stars of heaven! 
 Wind, rain, and thunder, remember, earthly man 
 Is but a substance that must yield to you; 
 And I, as fits my nature, do obey you: 
 Alas, the sea hath cast me on the rocks, 
 Wash'd me from shore to shore, and left me breath 
 Nothing to think on but ensuing death: 
 Let it suffice the greatness of your powers 
 To have bereft a prince of all his fortunes; 
 And having thrown him from your watery grave, 
 Here to have death in peace is all he'll crave. 

 Enter three FISHERMEN  First Fisherman  What, ho, Pilch! 
 Second Fisherman  Ha, come and bring away the nets! 
 First Fisherman  What, Patch-breech, I say! 
 Third Fisherman  What say you, master? 
 First Fisherman  Look how thou stirrest now! come away, or I'll 
 fetch thee with a wanion. 
 Third Fisherman  Faith, master, I am thinking of the poor men that 
 were cast away before us even now. 
 First Fisherman  Alas, poor souls, it grieved my heart to hear what 
 pitiful cries they made to us to help them, when, 
 well-a-day, we could scarce help ourselves. 
 Third Fisherman  Nay, master, said not I as much when I saw the 
 porpus how he bounced and tumbled? they say 
 they're half fish, half flesh: a plague on them, 
 they ne'er come but I look to be washed. Master, I 
 marvel how the fishes live in the sea. 
 First Fisherman  Why, as men do a-land; the great ones eat up the 
 little ones: I can compare our rich misers to 
 nothing so fitly as to a whale; a' plays and 
 tumbles, driving the poor fry before him, and at 
 last devours them all at a mouthful: such whales 
 have I heard on o' the land, who never leave gaping 
 till they've swallowed the whole parish, church, 
 steeple, bells, and all. 
 PERICLES  [Aside]  A pretty moral. 
 Third Fisherman  But, master, if I had been the sexton, I would have 
 been that day in the belfry. 
 Second Fisherman  Why, man? 
 Third Fisherman  Because he should have swallowed me too: and when I 
 had been in his belly, I would have kept such a 
 jangling of the bells, that he should never have 
 left, till he cast bells, steeple, church, and 
 parish up again. But if the good King Simonides 
 were of my mind,-- 
 PERICLES  [Aside]  Simonides! 
 Third Fisherman  We would purge the land of these drones, that rob 
 the bee of her honey. 
 PERICLES  [Aside]  How from the finny subject of the sea 
 These fishers tell the infirmities of men; 
 And from their watery empire recollect 
 All that may men approve or men detect! 
 Peace be at your labour, honest fishermen. 
 Second Fisherman  Honest! good fellow, what's that? If it be a day 
 fits you, search out of the calendar, and nobody 
 look after it. 
 PERICLES  May see the sea hath cast upon your coast. 
 Second Fisherman  What a drunken knave was the sea to cast thee in our 
 way! 
 PERICLES  A man whom both the waters and the wind, 
 In that vast tennis-court, have made the ball 
 For them to play upon, entreats you pity him: 
 He asks of you, that never used to beg. 
 First Fisherman  No, friend, cannot you beg? Here's them in our 
 country Greece gets more with begging than we can do 
 with working. 
 Second Fisherman  Canst thou catch any fishes, then? 
 PERICLES  I never practised it. 
 Second Fisherman  Nay, then thou wilt starve, sure; for here's nothing 
 to be got now-a-days, unless thou canst fish for't. 
 PERICLES  What I have been I have forgot to know; 
 But what I am, want teaches me to think on: 
 A man throng'd up with cold: my veins are chill, 
 And have no more of life than may suffice 
 To give my tongue that heat to ask your help; 
 Which if you shall refuse, when I am dead, 
 For that I am a man, pray see me buried. 
 First Fisherman  Die quoth-a? Now gods forbid! I have a gown here; 
 come, put it on; keep thee warm. Now, afore me, a 
 handsome fellow! Come, thou shalt go home, and 
 we'll have flesh for holidays, fish for 
 fasting-days, and moreo'er puddings and flap-jacks, 
 and thou shalt be welcome. 
 PERICLES  I thank you, sir. 
 Second Fisherman  Hark you, my friend; you said you could not beg. 
 PERICLES  I did but crave. 
 Second Fisherman  But crave! Then I'll turn craver too, and so I 
 shall 'scape whipping. 
 PERICLES  Why, are all your beggars whipped, then? 
 Second Fisherman  O, not all, my friend, not all; for if all your 
 beggars were whipped, I would wish no better office 
 than to be beadle. But, master, I'll go draw up the 
 net. 

 Exit with Third Fisherman  PERICLES  [Aside]  How well this honest mirth becomes their labour! 
 First Fisherman  Hark you, sir, do you know where ye are? 
 PERICLES  Not well. 
 First Fisherman  Why, I'll tell you: this is called Pentapolis, and 
 our king the good Simonides. 
 PERICLES  The good King Simonides, do you call him. 
 First Fisherman  Ay, sir; and he deserves so to be called for his 
 peaceable reign and good government. 
 PERICLES  He is a happy king, since he gains from his subjects 
 the name of good by his government. How far is his 
 court distant from this shore? 
 First Fisherman  Marry, sir, half a day's journey: and I'll tell 
 you, he hath a fair daughter, and to-morrow is her 
 birth-day; and there are princes and knights come 
 from all parts of the world to just and tourney for her love. 
 PERICLES  Were my fortunes equal to my desires, I could wish 
 to make one there. 
 First Fisherman  O, sir, things must be as they may; and what a man 
 cannot get, he may lawfully deal for--his wife's soul. 

 Re-enter Second and Third Fishermen, drawing up a net  Second Fisherman  Help, master, help! here's a fish hangs in the net, 
 like a poor man's right in the law; 'twill hardly 
 come out. Ha! bots on't, 'tis come at last, and 
 'tis turned to a rusty armour. 
 PERICLES  An armour, friends! I pray you, let me see it. 
 Thanks, fortune, yet, that, after all my crosses, 
 Thou givest me somewhat to repair myself; 
 And though it was mine own, part of my heritage, 
 Which my dead father did bequeath to me. 
 With this strict charge, even as he left his life, 
 'Keep it, my Pericles; it hath been a shield 
 Twixt me and death;'--and pointed to this brace;-- 
 'For that it saved me, keep it; in like necessity-- 
 The which the gods protect thee from!--may 
 defend thee.' 
 It kept where I kept, I so dearly loved it; 
 Till the rough seas, that spare not any man, 
 Took it in rage, though calm'd have given't again: 
 I thank thee for't: my shipwreck now's no ill, 
 Since I have here my father's gift in's will. 
 First Fisherman  What mean you, sir? 
 PERICLES  To beg of you, kind friends, this coat of worth, 
 For it was sometime target to a king; 
 I know it by this mark. He loved me dearly, 
 And for his sake I wish the having of it; 
 And that you'ld guide me to your sovereign's court, 
 Where with it I may appear a gentleman; 
 And if that ever my low fortune's better, 
 I'll pay your bounties; till then rest your debtor. 
 First Fisherman  Why, wilt thou tourney for the lady? 
 PERICLES  I'll show the virtue I have borne in arms. 
 First Fisherman  Why, do 'e take it, and the gods give thee good on't! 
 Second Fisherman  Ay, but hark you, my friend; 'twas we that made up 
 this garment through the rough seams of the waters: 
 there are certain condolements, certain vails. I 
 hope, sir, if you thrive, you'll remember from 
 whence you had it. 
 PERICLES  Believe 't, I will. 
 By your furtherance I am clothed in steel; 
 And, spite of all the rapture of the sea, 
 This jewel holds his building on my arm: 
 Unto thy value I will mount myself 
 Upon a courser, whose delightful steps 
 Shall make the gazer joy to see him tread. 
 Only, my friend, I yet am unprovided 
 Of a pair of bases. 
 Second Fisherman  We'll sure provide: thou shalt have my best gown to 
 make thee a pair; and I'll bring thee to the court myself. 
 PERICLES  Then honour be but a goal to my will, 
 This day I'll rise, or else add ill to ill. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Pericles  | Act 2, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 