SCENE III. The same. The Life and Death of Richard the Third  Shakespeare homepage  |  Richard III  | Act 4, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. The same. 
 Enter TYRREL  TYRREL  The tyrannous and bloody deed is done. 
 The most arch of piteous massacre 
 That ever yet this land was guilty of. 
 Dighton and Forrest, whom I did suborn 
 To do this ruthless piece of butchery, 
 Although they were flesh'd villains, bloody dogs, 
 Melting with tenderness and kind compassion 
 Wept like two children in their deaths' sad stories. 
 'Lo, thus' quoth Dighton, 'lay those tender babes:' 
 'Thus, thus,' quoth Forrest, 'girdling one another 
 Within their innocent alabaster arms: 
 Their lips were four red roses on a stalk, 
 Which in their summer beauty kiss'd each other. 
 A book of prayers on their pillow lay; 
 Which once,' quoth Forrest, 'almost changed my mind; 
 But O! the devil'--there the villain stopp'd 
 Whilst Dighton thus told on: 'We smothered 
 The most replenished sweet work of nature, 
 That from the prime creation e'er she framed.' 
 Thus both are gone with conscience and remorse; 
 They could not speak; and so I left them both, 
 To bring this tidings to the bloody king. 
 And here he comes. 

 Enter KING RICHARD III  All hail, my sovereign liege! 
 KING RICHARD III  Kind Tyrrel, am I happy in thy news? 
 TYRREL  If to have done the thing you gave in charge 
 Beget your happiness, be happy then, 
 For it is done, my lord. 
 KING RICHARD III  But didst thou see them dead? 
 TYRREL  I did, my lord. 
 KING RICHARD III  And buried, gentle Tyrrel? 
 TYRREL  The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them; 
 But how or in what place I do not know. 
 KING RICHARD III  Come to me, Tyrrel, soon at after supper, 
 And thou shalt tell the process of their death. 
 Meantime, but think how I may do thee good, 
 And be inheritor of thy desire. 
 Farewell till soon. 

 Exit TYRREL  The son of Clarence have I pent up close; 
 His daughter meanly have I match'd in marriage; 
 The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham's bosom, 
 And Anne my wife hath bid the world good night. 
 Now, for I know the Breton Richmond aims 
 At young Elizabeth, my brother's daughter, 
 And, by that knot, looks proudly o'er the crown, 
 To her I go, a jolly thriving wooer. 

 Enter CATESBY  CATESBY  My lord! 
 KING RICHARD III  Good news or bad, that thou comest in so bluntly? 
 CATESBY  Bad news, my lord: Ely is fled to Richmond; 
 And Buckingham, back'd with the hardy Welshmen, 
 Is in the field, and still his power increaseth. 
 KING RICHARD III  Ely with Richmond troubles me more near 
 Than Buckingham and his rash-levied army. 
 Come, I have heard that fearful commenting 
 Is leaden servitor to dull delay; 
 Delay leads impotent and snail-paced beggary 
 Then fiery expedition be my wing, 
 Jove's Mercury, and herald for a king! 
 Come, muster men: my counsel is my shield; 
 We must be brief when traitors brave the field. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Richard III  | Act 4, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 