SCENE I. London. A street. The Life and Death of Richard the Third  Shakespeare homepage  |  Richard III  | Act 1, Scene 1 
 Next scene  SCENE I. London. A street. 
 Enter GLOUCESTER, solus  GLOUCESTER  Now is the winter of our discontent 
 Made glorious summer by this sun of York; 
 And all the clouds that lour'd upon our house 
 In the deep bosom of the ocean buried. 
 Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths; 
 Our bruised arms hung up for monuments; 
 Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings, 
 Our dreadful marches to delightful measures. 
 Grim-visaged war hath smooth'd his wrinkled front; 
 And now, instead of mounting barded steeds 
 To fright the souls of fearful adversaries, 
 He capers nimbly in a lady's chamber 
 To the lascivious pleasing of a lute. 
 But I, that am not shaped for sportive tricks, 
 Nor made to court an amorous looking-glass; 
 I, that am rudely stamp'd, and want love's majesty 
 To strut before a wanton ambling nymph; 
 I, that am curtail'd of this fair proportion, 
 Cheated of feature by dissembling nature, 
 Deformed, unfinish'd, sent before my time 
 Into this breathing world, scarce half made up, 
 And that so lamely and unfashionable 
 That dogs bark at me as I halt by them; 
 Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace, 
 Have no delight to pass away the time, 
 Unless to spy my shadow in the sun 
 And descant on mine own deformity: 
 And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover, 
 To entertain these fair well-spoken days, 
 I am determined to prove a villain 
 And hate the idle pleasures of these days. 
 Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous, 
 By drunken prophecies, libels and dreams, 
 To set my brother Clarence and the king 
 In deadly hate the one against the other: 
 And if King Edward be as true and just 
 As I am subtle, false and treacherous, 
 This day should Clarence closely be mew'd up, 
 About a prophecy, which says that 'G' 
 Of Edward's heirs the murderer shall be. 
 Dive, thoughts, down to my soul: here 
 Clarence comes. 

 Enter CLARENCE, guarded, and BRAKENBURY  Brother, good day; what means this armed guard 
 That waits upon your grace? 
 CLARENCE  His majesty 
 Tendering my person's safety, hath appointed 
 This conduct to convey me to the Tower. 
 GLOUCESTER  Upon what cause? 
 CLARENCE  Because my name is George. 
 GLOUCESTER  Alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours; 
 He should, for that, commit your godfathers: 
 O, belike his majesty hath some intent 
 That you shall be new-christen'd in the Tower. 
 But what's the matter, Clarence?  may I know? 
 CLARENCE  Yea, Richard, when I know; for I protest 
 As yet I do not: but, as I can learn, 
 He hearkens after prophecies and dreams; 
 And from the cross-row plucks the letter G. 
 And says a wizard told him that by G 
 His issue disinherited should be; 
 And, for my name of George begins with G, 
 It follows in his thought that I am he. 
 These, as I learn, and such like toys as these 
 Have moved his highness to commit me now. 
 GLOUCESTER  Why, this it is, when men are ruled by women: 
 'Tis not the king that sends you to the Tower: 
 My Lady Grey his wife, Clarence, 'tis she 
 That tempers him to this extremity. 
 Was it not she and that good man of worship, 
 Anthony Woodville, her brother there, 
 That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower, 
 From whence this present day he is deliver'd? 
 We are not safe, Clarence; we are not safe. 
 CLARENCE  By heaven, I think there's no man is secure 
 But the queen's kindred and night-walking heralds 
 That trudge betwixt the king and Mistress Shore. 
 Heard ye not what an humble suppliant 
 Lord hastings was to her for his delivery? 
 GLOUCESTER  Humbly complaining to her deity 
 Got my lord chamberlain his liberty. 
 I'll tell you what; I think it is our way, 
 If we will keep in favour with the king, 
 To be her men and wear her livery: 
 The jealous o'erworn widow and herself, 
 Since that our brother dubb'd them gentlewomen. 
 Are mighty gossips in this monarchy. 
 BRAKENBURY  I beseech your graces both to pardon me; 
 His majesty hath straitly given in charge 
 That no man shall have private conference, 
 Of what degree soever, with his brother. 
 GLOUCESTER  Even so; an't please your worship, Brakenbury, 
 You may partake of any thing we say: 
 We speak no treason, man: we say the king 
 Is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen 
 Well struck in years, fair, and not jealous; 
 We say that Shore's wife hath a pretty foot, 
 A cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue; 
 And that the queen's kindred are made gentle-folks: 
 How say you sir? Can you deny all this? 
 BRAKENBURY  With this, my lord, myself have nought to do. 
 GLOUCESTER  Naught to do with mistress Shore! I tell thee, fellow, 
 He that doth naught with her, excepting one, 
 Were best he do it secretly, alone. 
 BRAKENBURY  What one, my lord? 
 GLOUCESTER  Her husband, knave: wouldst thou betray me? 
 BRAKENBURY  I beseech your grace to pardon me, and withal 
 Forbear your conference with the noble duke. 
 CLARENCE  We know thy charge, Brakenbury, and will obey. 
 GLOUCESTER  We are the queen's abjects, and must obey. 
 Brother, farewell: I will unto the king; 
 And whatsoever you will employ me in, 
 Were it to call King Edward's widow sister, 
 I will perform it to enfranchise you. 
 Meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood 
 Touches me deeper than you can imagine. 
 CLARENCE  I know it pleaseth neither of us well. 
 GLOUCESTER  Well, your imprisonment shall not be long; 
 Meantime, have patience. 
 CLARENCE  I must perforce. Farewell. 

 Exeunt CLARENCE, BRAKENBURY, and Guard  GLOUCESTER  Go, tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return. 
 Simple, plain Clarence! I do love thee so, 
 That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven, 
 If heaven will take the present at our hands. 
 But who comes here? the new-deliver'd Hastings? 

 Enter HASTINGS  HASTINGS  Good time of day unto my gracious lord! 
 GLOUCESTER  As much unto my good lord chamberlain! 
 Well are you welcome to the open air. 
 How hath your lordship brook'd imprisonment? 
 HASTINGS  With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must: 
 But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanks 
 That were the cause of my imprisonment. 
 GLOUCESTER  No doubt, no doubt; and so shall Clarence too; 
 For they that were your enemies are his, 
 And have prevail'd as much on him as you. 
 HASTINGS  More pity that the eagle should be mew'd, 
 While kites and buzzards prey at liberty. 
 GLOUCESTER  What news abroad? 
 HASTINGS  No news so bad abroad as this at home; 
 The King is sickly, weak and melancholy, 
 And his physicians fear him mightily. 
 GLOUCESTER  Now, by Saint Paul, this news is bad indeed. 
 O, he hath kept an evil diet long, 
 And overmuch consumed his royal person: 
 'Tis very grievous to be thought upon. 
 What, is he in his bed? 
 HASTINGS  He is. 
 GLOUCESTER  Go you before, and I will follow you. 

 Exit HASTINGS  He cannot live, I hope; and must not die 
 Till George be pack'd with post-horse up to heaven. 
 I'll in, to urge his hatred more to Clarence, 
 With lies well steel'd with weighty arguments; 
 And, if I fall not in my deep intent, 
 Clarence hath not another day to live: 
 Which done, God take King Edward to his mercy, 
 And leave the world for me to bustle in! 
 For then I'll marry Warwick's youngest daughter. 
 What though I kill'd her husband and her father? 
 The readiest way to make the wench amends 
 Is to become her husband and her father: 
 The which will I; not all so much for love 
 As for another secret close intent, 
 By marrying her which I must reach unto. 
 But yet I run before my horse to market: 
 Clarence still breathes; Edward still lives and reigns: 
 When they are gone, then must I count my gains. 

 Exit  Shakespeare homepage  |  Richard III  | Act 1, Scene 1 
 Next scene 