SCENE III. The palace. The Life and Death of Richard the Third  Shakespeare homepage  |  Richard III  | Act 1, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. The palace. 
 Enter QUEEN ELIZABETH, RIVERS, and GREY  RIVERS  Have patience, madam: there's no doubt his majesty 
 Will soon recover his accustom'd health. 
 GREY  In that you brook it in, it makes him worse: 
 Therefore, for God's sake, entertain good comfort, 
 And cheer his grace with quick and merry words. 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  If he were dead, what would betide of me? 
 RIVERS  No other harm but loss of such a lord. 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  The loss of such a lord includes all harm. 
 GREY  The heavens have bless'd you with a goodly son, 
 To be your comforter when he is gone. 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  Oh, he is young and his minority 
 Is put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester, 
 A man that loves not me, nor none of you. 
 RIVERS  Is it concluded that he shall be protector? 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  It is determined, not concluded yet: 
 But so it must be, if the king miscarry. 

 Enter BUCKINGHAM and DERBY  GREY  Here come the lords of Buckingham and Derby. 
 BUCKINGHAM  Good time of day unto your royal grace! 
 DERBY  God make your majesty joyful as you have been! 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  The Countess Richmond, good my Lord of Derby. 
 To your good prayers will scarcely say amen. 
 Yet, Derby, notwithstanding she's your wife, 
 And loves not me, be you, good lord, assured 
 I hate not you for her proud arrogance. 
 DERBY  I do beseech you, either not believe 
 The envious slanders of her false accusers; 
 Or, if she be accused in true report, 
 Bear with her weakness, which, I think proceeds 
 From wayward sickness, and no grounded malice. 
 RIVERS  Saw you the king to-day, my Lord of Derby? 
 DERBY  But now the Duke of Buckingham and I 
 Are come from visiting his majesty. 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  What likelihood of his amendment, lords? 
 BUCKINGHAM  Madam, good hope; his grace speaks cheerfully. 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  God grant him health! Did you confer with him? 
 BUCKINGHAM  Madam, we did: he desires to make atonement 
 Betwixt the Duke of Gloucester and your brothers, 
 And betwixt them and my lord chamberlain; 
 And sent to warn them to his royal presence. 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  Would all were well! but that will never be 
 I fear our happiness is at the highest. 

 Enter GLOUCESTER, HASTINGS, and DORSET  GLOUCESTER  They do me wrong, and I will not endure it: 
 Who are they that complain unto the king, 
 That I, forsooth, am stern, and love them not? 
 By holy Paul, they love his grace but lightly 
 That fill his ears with such dissentious rumours. 
 Because I cannot flatter and speak fair, 
 Smile in men's faces, smooth, deceive and cog, 
 Duck with French nods and apish courtesy, 
 I must be held a rancorous enemy. 
 Cannot a plain man live and think no harm, 
 But thus his simple truth must be abused 
 By silken, sly, insinuating Jacks? 
 RIVERS  To whom in all this presence speaks your grace? 
 GLOUCESTER  To thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace. 
 When have I injured thee? when done thee wrong? 
 Or thee? or thee? or any of your faction? 
 A plague upon you all! His royal person,-- 
 Whom God preserve better than you would wish!-- 
 Cannot be quiet scarce a breathing-while, 
 But you must trouble him with lewd complaints. 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the matter. 
 The king, of his own royal disposition, 
 And not provoked by any suitor else; 
 Aiming, belike, at your interior hatred, 
 Which in your outward actions shows itself 
 Against my kindred, brothers, and myself, 
 Makes him to send; that thereby he may gather 
 The ground of your ill-will, and so remove it. 
 GLOUCESTER  I cannot tell: the world is grown so bad, 
 That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch: 
 Since every Jack became a gentleman 
 There's many a gentle person made a Jack. 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  Come, come, we know your meaning, brother 
 Gloucester; 
 You envy my advancement and my friends': 
 God grant we never may have need of you! 
 GLOUCESTER  Meantime, God grants that we have need of you: 
 Your brother is imprison'd by your means, 
 Myself disgraced, and the nobility 
 Held in contempt; whilst many fair promotions 
 Are daily given to ennoble those 
 That scarce, some two days since, were worth a noble. 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  By Him that raised me to this careful height 
 From that contented hap which I enjoy'd, 
 I never did incense his majesty 
 Against the Duke of Clarence, but have been 
 An earnest advocate to plead for him. 
 My lord, you do me shameful injury, 
 Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects. 
 GLOUCESTER  You may deny that you were not the cause 
 Of my Lord Hastings' late imprisonment. 
 RIVERS  She may, my lord, for-- 
 GLOUCESTER  She may, Lord Rivers! why, who knows not so? 
 She may do more, sir, than denying that: 
 She may help you to many fair preferments, 
 And then deny her aiding hand therein, 
 And lay those honours on your high deserts. 
 What may she not? She may, yea, marry, may she-- 
 RIVERS  What, marry, may she? 
 GLOUCESTER  What, marry, may she! marry with a king, 
 A bachelor, a handsome stripling too: 
 I wis your grandam had a worser match. 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  My Lord of Gloucester, I have too long borne 
 Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs: 
 By heaven, I will acquaint his majesty 
 With those gross taunts I often have endured. 
 I had rather be a country servant-maid 
 Than a great queen, with this condition, 
 To be thus taunted, scorn'd, and baited at: 

 Enter QUEEN MARGARET, behind  Small joy have I in being England's queen. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  And lessen'd be that small, God, I beseech thee! 
 Thy honour, state and seat is due to me. 
 GLOUCESTER  What! threat you me with telling of the king? 
 Tell him, and spare not: look, what I have said 
 I will avouch in presence of the king: 
 I dare adventure to be sent to the Tower. 
 'Tis time to speak; my pains are quite forgot. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Out, devil! I remember them too well: 
 Thou slewest my husband Henry in the Tower, 
 And Edward, my poor son, at Tewksbury. 
 GLOUCESTER  Ere you were queen, yea, or your husband king, 
 I was a pack-horse in his great affairs; 
 A weeder-out of his proud adversaries, 
 A liberal rewarder of his friends: 
 To royalize his blood I spilt mine own. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Yea, and much better blood than his or thine. 
 GLOUCESTER  In all which time you and your husband Grey 
 Were factious for the house of Lancaster; 
 And, Rivers, so were you. Was not your husband 
 In Margaret's battle at Saint Alban's slain? 
 Let me put in your minds, if you forget, 
 What you have been ere now, and what you are; 
 Withal, what I have been, and what I am. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  A murderous villain, and so still thou art. 
 GLOUCESTER  Poor Clarence did forsake his father, Warwick; 
 Yea, and forswore himself,--which Jesu pardon!-- 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Which God revenge! 
 GLOUCESTER  To fight on Edward's party for the crown; 
 And for his meed, poor lord, he is mew'd up. 
 I would to God my heart were flint, like Edward's; 
 Or Edward's soft and pitiful, like mine 
 I am too childish-foolish for this world. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Hie thee to hell for shame, and leave the world, 
 Thou cacodemon! there thy kingdom is. 
 RIVERS  My Lord of Gloucester, in those busy days 
 Which here you urge to prove us enemies, 
 We follow'd then our lord, our lawful king: 
 So should we you, if you should be our king. 
 GLOUCESTER  If I should be! I had rather be a pedlar: 
 Far be it from my heart, the thought of it! 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  As little joy, my lord, as you suppose 
 You should enjoy, were you this country's king, 
 As little joy may you suppose in me. 
 That I enjoy, being the queen thereof. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  A little joy enjoys the queen thereof; 
 For I am she, and altogether joyless. 
 I can no longer hold me patient. 

 Advancing  Hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out 
 In sharing that which you have pill'd from me! 
 Which of you trembles not that looks on me? 
 If not, that, I being queen, you bow like subjects, 
 Yet that, by you deposed, you quake like rebels? 
 O gentle villain, do not turn away! 
 GLOUCESTER  Foul wrinkled witch, what makest thou in my sight? 
 QUEEN MARGARET  But repetition of what thou hast marr'd; 
 That will I make before I let thee go. 
 GLOUCESTER  Wert thou not banished on pain of death? 
 QUEEN MARGARET  I was; but I do find more pain in banishment 
 Than death can yield me here by my abode. 
 A husband and a son thou owest to me; 
 And thou a kingdom; all of you allegiance: 
 The sorrow that I have, by right is yours, 
 And all the pleasures you usurp are mine. 
 GLOUCESTER  The curse my noble father laid on thee, 
 When thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper 
 And with thy scorns drew'st rivers from his eyes, 
 And then, to dry them, gavest the duke a clout 
 Steep'd in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland-- 
 His curses, then from bitterness of soul 
 Denounced against thee, are all fall'n upon thee; 
 And God, not we, hath plagued thy bloody deed. 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  So just is God, to right the innocent. 
 HASTINGS  O, 'twas the foulest deed to slay that babe, 
 And the most merciless that e'er was heard of! 
 RIVERS  Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported. 
 DORSET  No man but prophesied revenge for it. 
 BUCKINGHAM  Northumberland, then present, wept to see it. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  What were you snarling all before I came, 
 Ready to catch each other by the throat, 
 And turn you all your hatred now on me? 
 Did York's dread curse prevail so much with heaven? 
 That Henry's death, my lovely Edward's death, 
 Their kingdom's loss, my woful banishment, 
 Could all but answer for that peevish brat? 
 Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven? 
 Why, then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses! 
 If not by war, by surfeit die your king, 
 As ours by murder, to make him a king! 
 Edward thy son, which now is Prince of Wales, 
 For Edward my son, which was Prince of Wales, 
 Die in his youth by like untimely violence! 
 Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen, 
 Outlive thy glory, like my wretched self! 
 Long mayst thou live to wail thy children's loss; 
 And see another, as I see thee now, 
 Deck'd in thy rights, as thou art stall'd in mine! 
 Long die thy happy days before thy death; 
 And, after many lengthen'd hours of grief, 
 Die neither mother, wife, nor England's queen! 
 Rivers and Dorset, you were standers by, 
 And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son 
 Was stabb'd with bloody daggers: God, I pray him, 
 That none of you may live your natural age, 
 But by some unlook'd accident cut off! 
 GLOUCESTER  Have done thy charm, thou hateful wither'd hag! 
 QUEEN MARGARET  And leave out thee? stay, dog, for thou shalt hear me. 
 If heaven have any grievous plague in store 
 Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee, 
 O, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe, 
 And then hurl down their indignation 
 On thee, the troubler of the poor world's peace! 
 The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul! 
 Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou livest, 
 And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends! 
 No sleep close up that deadly eye of thine, 
 Unless it be whilst some tormenting dream 
 Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils! 
 Thou elvish-mark'd, abortive, rooting hog! 
 Thou that wast seal'd in thy nativity 
 The slave of nature and the son of hell! 
 Thou slander of thy mother's heavy womb! 
 Thou loathed issue of thy father's loins! 
 Thou rag of honour! thou detested-- 
 GLOUCESTER  Margaret. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Richard! 
 GLOUCESTER  Ha! 
 QUEEN MARGARET  I call thee not. 
 GLOUCESTER  I cry thee mercy then, for I had thought 
 That thou hadst call'd me all these bitter names. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Why, so I did; but look'd for no reply. 
 O, let me make the period to my curse! 
 GLOUCESTER  'Tis done by me, and ends in 'Margaret.' 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  Thus have you breathed your curse against yourself. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Poor painted queen, vain flourish of my fortune! 
 Why strew'st thou sugar on that bottled spider, 
 Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about? 
 Fool, fool! thou whet'st a knife to kill thyself. 
 The time will come when thou shalt wish for me 
 To help thee curse that poisonous bunchback'd toad. 
 HASTINGS  False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse, 
 Lest to thy harm thou move our patience. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Foul shame upon you! you have all moved mine. 
 RIVERS  Were you well served, you would be taught your duty. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  To serve me well, you all should do me duty, 
 Teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects: 
 O, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty! 
 DORSET  Dispute not with her; she is lunatic. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Peace, master marquess, you are malapert: 
 Your fire-new stamp of honour is scarce current. 
 O, that your young nobility could judge 
 What 'twere to lose it, and be miserable! 
 They that stand high have many blasts to shake them; 
 And if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces. 
 GLOUCESTER  Good counsel, marry: learn it, learn it, marquess. 
 DORSET  It toucheth you, my lord, as much as me. 
 GLOUCESTER  Yea, and much more: but I was born so high, 
 Our aery buildeth in the cedar's top, 
 And dallies with the wind and scorns the sun. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  And turns the sun to shade; alas! alas! 
 Witness my son, now in the shade of death; 
 Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath 
 Hath in eternal darkness folded up. 
 Your aery buildeth in our aery's nest. 
 O God, that seest it, do not suffer it! 
 As it was won with blood, lost be it so! 
 BUCKINGHAM  Have done! for shame, if not for charity. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Urge neither charity nor shame to me: 
 Uncharitably with me have you dealt, 
 And shamefully by you my hopes are butcher'd. 
 My charity is outrage, life my shame 
 And in that shame still live my sorrow's rage. 
 BUCKINGHAM  Have done, have done. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  O princely Buckingham I'll kiss thy hand, 
 In sign of league and amity with thee: 
 Now fair befal thee and thy noble house! 
 Thy garments are not spotted with our blood, 
 Nor thou within the compass of my curse. 
 BUCKINGHAM  Nor no one here; for curses never pass 
 The lips of those that breathe them in the air. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  I'll not believe but they ascend the sky, 
 And there awake God's gentle-sleeping peace. 
 O Buckingham, take heed of yonder dog! 
 Look, when he fawns, he bites; and when he bites, 
 His venom tooth will rankle to the death: 
 Have not to do with him, beware of him; 
 Sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him, 
 And all their ministers attend on him. 
 GLOUCESTER  What doth she say, my Lord of Buckingham? 
 BUCKINGHAM  Nothing that I respect, my gracious lord. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  What, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel? 
 And soothe the devil that I warn thee from? 
 O, but remember this another day, 
 When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow, 
 And say poor Margaret was a prophetess! 
 Live each of you the subjects to his hate, 
 And he to yours, and all of you to God's! 

 Exit  HASTINGS  My hair doth stand on end to hear her curses. 
 RIVERS  And so doth mine: I muse why she's at liberty. 
 GLOUCESTER  I cannot blame her: by God's holy mother, 
 She hath had too much wrong; and I repent 
 My part thereof that I have done to her. 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  I never did her any, to my knowledge. 
 GLOUCESTER  But you have all the vantage of her wrong. 
 I was too hot to do somebody good, 
 That is too cold in thinking of it now. 
 Marry, as for Clarence, he is well repaid, 
 He is frank'd up to fatting for his pains 
 God pardon them that are the cause of it! 
 RIVERS  A virtuous and a Christian-like conclusion, 
 To pray for them that have done scathe to us. 
 GLOUCESTER  So do I ever: 

 Aside  being well-advised. 
 For had I cursed now, I had cursed myself. 

 Enter CATESBY  CATESBY  Madam, his majesty doth call for you, 
 And for your grace; and you, my noble lords. 
 QUEEN ELIZABETH  Catesby, we come. Lords, will you go with us? 
 RIVERS  Madam, we will attend your grace. 

 Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER  GLOUCESTER  I do the wrong, and first begin to brawl. 
 The secret mischiefs that I set abroach 
 I lay unto the grievous charge of others. 
 Clarence, whom I, indeed, have laid in darkness, 
 I do beweep to many simple gulls 
 Namely, to Hastings, Derby, Buckingham; 
 And say it is the queen and her allies 
 That stir the king against the duke my brother. 
 Now, they believe it; and withal whet me 
 To be revenged on Rivers, Vaughan, Grey: 
 But then I sigh; and, with a piece of scripture, 
 Tell them that God bids us do good for evil: 
 And thus I clothe my naked villany 
 With old odd ends stolen out of holy writ; 
 And seem a saint, when most I play the devil. 

 Enter two Murderers  But, soft! here come my executioners. 
 How now, my hardy, stout resolved mates! 
 Are you now going to dispatch this deed? 
 First Murderer  We are, my lord; and come to have the warrant 
 That we may be admitted where he is. 
 GLOUCESTER  Well thought upon; I have it here about me. 

 Gives the warrant  When you have done, repair to Crosby Place. 
 But, sirs, be sudden in the execution, 
 Withal obdurate, do not hear him plead; 
 For Clarence is well-spoken, and perhaps 
 May move your hearts to pity if you mark him. 
 First Murderer  Tush! 
 Fear not, my lord, we will not stand to prate; 
 Talkers are no good doers: be assured 
 We come to use our hands and not our tongues. 
 GLOUCESTER  Your eyes drop millstones, when fools' eyes drop tears: 
 I like you, lads; about your business straight; 
 Go, go, dispatch. 
 First Murderer  We will, my noble lord. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Richard III  | Act 1, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 