SCENE IV. London. The Tower. The Life and Death of Richard the Third  Shakespeare homepage  |  Richard III  | Act 1, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE IV. London. The Tower. 
 Enter CLARENCE and BRAKENBURY  BRAKENBURY  Why looks your grace so heavily today? 
 CLARENCE  O, I have pass'd a miserable night, 
 So full of ugly sights, of ghastly dreams, 
 That, as I am a Christian faithful man, 
 I would not spend another such a night, 
 Though 'twere to buy a world of happy days, 
 So full of dismal terror was the time! 
 BRAKENBURY  What was your dream? I long to hear you tell it. 
 CLARENCE  Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower, 
 And was embark'd to cross to Burgundy; 
 And, in my company, my brother Gloucester; 
 Who from my cabin tempted me to walk 
 Upon the hatches: thence we looked toward England, 
 And cited up a thousand fearful times, 
 During the wars of York and Lancaster 
 That had befall'n us. As we paced along 
 Upon the giddy footing of the hatches, 
 Methought that Gloucester stumbled; and, in falling, 
 Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard, 
 Into the tumbling billows of the main. 
 Lord, Lord! methought, what pain it was to drown! 
 What dreadful noise of waters in mine ears! 
 What ugly sights of death within mine eyes! 
 Methought I saw a thousand fearful wrecks; 
 Ten thousand men that fishes gnaw'd upon; 
 Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl, 
 Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels, 
 All scatter'd in the bottom of the sea: 
 Some lay in dead men's skulls; and, in those holes 
 Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept, 
 As 'twere in scorn of eyes, reflecting gems, 
 Which woo'd the slimy bottom of the deep, 
 And mock'd the dead bones that lay scatter'd by. 
 BRAKENBURY  Had you such leisure in the time of death 
 To gaze upon the secrets of the deep? 
 CLARENCE  Methought I had; and often did I strive 
 To yield the ghost: but still the envious flood 
 Kept in my soul, and would not let it forth 
 To seek the empty, vast and wandering air; 
 But smother'd it within my panting bulk, 
 Which almost burst to belch it in the sea. 
 BRAKENBURY  Awaked you not with this sore agony? 
 CLARENCE  O, no, my dream was lengthen'd after life; 
 O, then began the tempest to my soul, 
 Who pass'd, methought, the melancholy flood, 
 With that grim ferryman which poets write of, 
 Unto the kingdom of perpetual night. 
 The first that there did greet my stranger soul, 
 Was my great father-in-law, renowned Warwick; 
 Who cried aloud, 'What scourge for perjury 
 Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?' 
 And so he vanish'd: then came wandering by 
 A shadow like an angel, with bright hair 
 Dabbled in blood; and he squeak'd out aloud, 
 'Clarence is come; false, fleeting, perjured Clarence, 
 That stabb'd me in the field by Tewksbury; 
 Seize on him, Furies, take him to your torments!' 
 With that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends 
 Environ'd me about, and howled in mine ears 
 Such hideous cries, that with the very noise 
 I trembling waked, and for a season after 
 Could not believe but that I was in hell, 
 Such terrible impression made the dream. 
 BRAKENBURY  No marvel, my lord, though it affrighted you; 
 I promise, I am afraid to hear you tell it. 
 CLARENCE  O Brakenbury, I have done those things, 
 Which now bear evidence against my soul, 
 For Edward's sake; and see how he requites me! 
 O God! if my deep prayers cannot appease thee, 
 But thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds, 
 Yet execute thy wrath in me alone, 
 O, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children! 
 I pray thee, gentle keeper, stay by me; 
 My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep. 
 BRAKENBURY  I will, my lord: God give your grace good rest! 

 CLARENCE sleeps  Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours, 
 Makes the night morning, and the noon-tide night. 
 Princes have but their tides for their glories, 
 An outward honour for an inward toil; 
 And, for unfelt imagination, 
 They often feel a world of restless cares: 
 So that, betwixt their tides and low names, 
 There's nothing differs but the outward fame. 

 Enter the two Murderers  First Murderer  Ho! who's here? 
 BRAKENBURY  In God's name what are you, and how came you hither? 
 First Murderer  I would speak with Clarence, and I came hither on my legs. 
 BRAKENBURY  Yea, are you so brief? 
 Second Murderer  O sir, it is better to be brief than tedious. Show 
 him our commission; talk no more. 

 BRAKENBURY reads it  BRAKENBURY  I am, in this, commanded to deliver 
 The noble Duke of Clarence to your hands: 
 I will not reason what is meant hereby, 
 Because I will be guiltless of the meaning. 
 Here are the keys, there sits the duke asleep: 
 I'll to the king; and signify to him 
 That thus I have resign'd my charge to you. 
 First Murderer  Do so, it is a point of wisdom: fare you well. 

 Exit BRAKENBURY  Second Murderer  What, shall we stab him as he sleeps? 
 First Murderer  No; then he will say 'twas done cowardly, when he wakes. 
 Second Murderer  When he wakes! why, fool, he shall never wake till 
 the judgment-day. 
 First Murderer  Why, then he will say we stabbed him sleeping. 
 Second Murderer  The urging of that word 'judgment' hath bred a kind 
 of remorse in me. 
 First Murderer  What, art thou afraid? 
 Second Murderer  Not to kill him, having a warrant for it; but to be 
 damned for killing him, from which no warrant can defend us. 
 First Murderer  I thought thou hadst been resolute. 
 Second Murderer  So I am, to let him live. 
 First Murderer  Back to the Duke of Gloucester, tell him so. 
 Second Murderer  I pray thee, stay a while: I hope my holy humour 
 will change; 'twas wont to hold me but while one 
 would tell twenty. 
 First Murderer  How dost thou feel thyself now? 
 Second Murderer  'Faith, some certain dregs of conscience are yet 
 within me. 
 First Murderer  Remember our reward, when the deed is done. 
 Second Murderer  'Zounds, he dies: I had forgot the reward. 
 First Murderer  Where is thy conscience now? 
 Second Murderer  In the Duke of Gloucester's purse. 
 First Murderer  So when he opens his purse to give us our reward, 
 thy conscience flies out. 
 Second Murderer  Let it go; there's few or none will entertain it. 
 First Murderer  How if it come to thee again? 
 Second Murderer  I'll not meddle with it: it is a dangerous thing: it 
 makes a man a coward: a man cannot steal, but it 
 accuseth him; he cannot swear, but it cheques him; 
 he cannot lie with his neighbour's wife, but it 
 detects him: 'tis a blushing shamefast spirit that 
 mutinies in a man's bosom; it fills one full of 
 obstacles: it made me once restore a purse of gold 
 that I found; it beggars any man that keeps it: it 
 is turned out of all towns and cities for a 
 dangerous thing; and every man that means to live 
 well endeavours to trust to himself and to live 
 without it. 
 First Murderer  'Zounds, it is even now at my elbow, persuading me 
 not to kill the duke. 
 Second Murderer  Take the devil in thy mind, and relieve him not: he 
 would insinuate with thee but to make thee sigh. 
 First Murderer  Tut, I am strong-framed, he cannot prevail with me, 
 I warrant thee. 
 Second Murderer  Spoke like a tail fellow that respects his 
 reputation. Come, shall we to this gear? 
 First Murderer  Take him over the costard with the hilts of thy 
 sword, and then we will chop him in the malmsey-butt 
 in the next room. 
 Second Murderer  O excellent devise! make a sop of him. 
 First Murderer  Hark! he stirs: shall I strike? 
 Second Murderer  No, first let's reason with him. 
 CLARENCE  Where art thou, keeper? give me a cup of wine. 
 Second murderer  You shall have wine enough, my lord, anon. 
 CLARENCE  In God's name, what art thou? 
 Second Murderer  A man, as you are. 
 CLARENCE  But not, as I am, royal. 
 Second Murderer  Nor you, as we are, loyal. 
 CLARENCE  Thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble. 
 Second Murderer  My voice is now the king's, my looks mine own. 
 CLARENCE  How darkly and how deadly dost thou speak! 
 Your eyes do menace me: why look you pale? 
 Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come? 
 Both  To, to, to-- 
 CLARENCE  To murder me? 
 Both  Ay, ay. 
 CLARENCE  You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so, 
 And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it. 
 Wherein, my friends, have I offended you? 
 First Murderer  Offended us you have not, but the king. 
 CLARENCE  I shall be reconciled to him again. 
 Second Murderer  Never, my lord; therefore prepare to die. 
 CLARENCE  Are you call'd forth from out a world of men 
 To slay the innocent? What is my offence? 
 Where are the evidence that do accuse me? 
 What lawful quest have given their verdict up 
 Unto the frowning judge? or who pronounced 
 The bitter sentence of poor Clarence' death? 
 Before I be convict by course of law, 
 To threaten me with death is most unlawful. 
 I charge you, as you hope to have redemption 
 By Christ's dear blood shed for our grievous sins, 
 That you depart and lay no hands on me 
 The deed you undertake is damnable. 
 First Murderer  What we will do, we do upon command. 
 Second Murderer  And he that hath commanded is the king. 
 CLARENCE  Erroneous vassal! the great King of kings 
 Hath in the tables of his law commanded 
 That thou shalt do no murder: and wilt thou, then, 
 Spurn at his edict and fulfil a man's? 
 Take heed; for he holds vengeance in his hands, 
 To hurl upon their heads that break his law. 
 Second Murderer  And that same vengeance doth he hurl on thee, 
 For false forswearing and for murder too: 
 Thou didst receive the holy sacrament, 
 To fight in quarrel of the house of Lancaster. 
 First Murderer  And, like a traitor to the name of God, 
 Didst break that vow; and with thy treacherous blade 
 Unrip'dst the bowels of thy sovereign's son. 
 Second Murderer  Whom thou wert sworn to cherish and defend. 
 First Murderer  How canst thou urge God's dreadful law to us, 
 When thou hast broke it in so dear degree? 
 CLARENCE  Alas! for whose sake did I that ill deed? 
 For Edward, for my brother, for his sake: Why, sirs, 
 He sends ye not to murder me for this 
 For in this sin he is as deep as I. 
 If God will be revenged for this deed. 
 O, know you yet, he doth it publicly, 
 Take not the quarrel from his powerful arm; 
 He needs no indirect nor lawless course 
 To cut off those that have offended him. 
 First Murderer  Who made thee, then, a bloody minister, 
 When gallant-springing brave Plantagenet, 
 That princely novice, was struck dead by thee? 
 CLARENCE  My brother's love, the devil, and my rage. 
 First Murderer  Thy brother's love, our duty, and thy fault, 
 Provoke us hither now to slaughter thee. 
 CLARENCE  Oh, if you love my brother, hate not me; 
 I am his brother, and I love him well. 
 If you be hired for meed, go back again, 
 And I will send you to my brother Gloucester, 
 Who shall reward you better for my life 
 Than Edward will for tidings of my death. 
 Second Murderer  You are deceived, your brother Gloucester hates you. 
 CLARENCE  O, no, he loves me, and he holds me dear: 
 Go you to him from me. 
 Both  Ay, so we will. 
 CLARENCE  Tell him, when that our princely father York 
 Bless'd his three sons with his victorious arm, 
 And charged us from his soul to love each other, 
 He little thought of this divided friendship: 
 Bid Gloucester think of this, and he will weep. 
 First Murderer  Ay, millstones; as be lesson'd us to weep. 
 CLARENCE  O, do not slander him, for he is kind. 
 First Murderer  Right, 
 As snow in harvest. Thou deceivest thyself: 
 'Tis he that sent us hither now to slaughter thee. 
 CLARENCE  It cannot be; for when I parted with him, 
 He hugg'd me in his arms, and swore, with sobs, 
 That he would labour my delivery. 
 Second Murderer  Why, so he doth, now he delivers thee 
 From this world's thraldom to the joys of heaven. 
 First Murderer  Make peace with God, for you must die, my lord. 
 CLARENCE  Hast thou that holy feeling in thy soul, 
 To counsel me to make my peace with God, 
 And art thou yet to thy own soul so blind, 
 That thou wilt war with God by murdering me? 
 Ah, sirs, consider, he that set you on 
 To do this deed will hate you for the deed. 
 Second Murderer  What shall we do? 
 CLARENCE  Relent, and save your souls. 
 First Murderer  Relent! 'tis cowardly and womanish. 
 CLARENCE  Not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish. 
 Which of you, if you were a prince's son, 
 Being pent from liberty, as I am now, 
 if two such murderers as yourselves came to you, 
 Would not entreat for life? 
 My friend, I spy some pity in thy looks: 
 O, if thine eye be not a flatterer, 
 Come thou on my side, and entreat for me, 
 As you would beg, were you in my distress 
 A begging prince what beggar pities not? 
 Second Murderer  Look behind you, my lord. 
 First Murderer  Take that, and that: if all this will not do, 

 Stabs him  I'll drown you in the malmsey-butt within. 

 Exit, with the body  Second Murderer  A bloody deed, and desperately dispatch'd! 
 How fain, like Pilate, would I wash my hands 
 Of this most grievous guilty murder done! 

 Re-enter First Murderer  First Murderer  How now! what mean'st thou, that thou help'st me not? 
 By heavens, the duke shall know how slack thou art! 
 Second Murderer  I would he knew that I had saved his brother! 
 Take thou the fee, and tell him what I say; 
 For I repent me that the duke is slain. 

 Exit  First Murderer  So do not I: go, coward as thou art. 
 Now must I hide his body in some hole, 
 Until the duke take order for his burial: 
 And when I have my meed, I must away; 
 For this will out, and here I must not stay. 
 Shakespeare homepage  |  Richard III  | Act 1, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 