SCENE IV. The court. The Life and Death of Richard the Second  Shakespeare homepage  |  Richard II  | Act 1, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE IV. The court. 
 Enter KING RICHARD II, with BAGOT and GREEN at one door; and the DUKE OF AUMERLE at another  KING RICHARD II  We did observe. Cousin Aumerle, 
 How far brought you high Hereford on his way? 
 DUKE OF AUMERLE  I brought high Hereford, if you call him so, 
 But to the next highway, and there I left him. 
 KING RICHARD II  And say, what store of parting tears were shed? 
 DUKE OF AUMERLE  Faith, none for me; except the north-east wind, 
 Which then blew bitterly against our faces, 
 Awaked the sleeping rheum, and so by chance 
 Did grace our hollow parting with a tear. 
 KING RICHARD II  What said our cousin when you parted with him? 
 DUKE OF AUMERLE  'Farewell:' 
 And, for my heart disdained that my tongue 
 Should so profane the word, that taught me craft 
 To counterfeit oppression of such grief 
 That words seem'd buried in my sorrow's grave. 
 Marry, would the word 'farewell' have lengthen'd hours 
 And added years to his short banishment, 
 He should have had a volume of farewells; 
 But since it would not, he had none of me. 
 KING RICHARD II  He is our cousin, cousin; but 'tis doubt, 
 When time shall call him home from banishment, 
 Whether our kinsman come to see his friends. 
 Ourself and Bushy, Bagot here and Green 
 Observed his courtship to the common people; 
 How he did seem to dive into their hearts 
 With humble and familiar courtesy, 
 What reverence he did throw away on slaves, 
 Wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles 
 And patient underbearing of his fortune, 
 As 'twere to banish their affects with him. 
 Off goes his bonnet to an oyster-wench; 
 A brace of draymen bid God speed him well 
 And had the tribute of his supple knee, 
 With 'Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends;' 
 As were our England in reversion his, 
 And he our subjects' next degree in hope. 
 GREEN  Well, he is gone; and with him go these thoughts. 
 Now for the rebels which stand out in Ireland, 
 Expedient manage must be made, my liege, 
 Ere further leisure yield them further means 
 For their advantage and your highness' loss. 
 KING RICHARD II  We will ourself in person to this war: 
 And, for our coffers, with too great a court 
 And liberal largess, are grown somewhat light, 
 We are inforced to farm our royal realm; 
 The revenue whereof shall furnish us 
 For our affairs in hand: if that come short, 
 Our substitutes at home shall have blank charters; 
 Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich, 
 They shall subscribe them for large sums of gold 
 And send them after to supply our wants; 
 For we will make for Ireland presently. 

 Enter BUSHY  Bushy, what news? 
 BUSHY  Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick, my lord, 
 Suddenly taken; and hath sent post haste 
 To entreat your majesty to visit him. 
 KING RICHARD II  Where lies he? 
 BUSHY  At Ely House. 
 KING RICHARD II  Now put it, God, in the physician's mind 
 To help him to his grave immediately! 
 The lining of his coffers shall make coats 
 To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars. 
 Come, gentlemen, let's all go visit him: 
 Pray God we may make haste, and come too late! 
 All  Amen. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Richard II  | Act 1, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 