SCENE VI. Friar Laurence's cell. Romeo and Juliet  Shakespeare homepage  |  Romeo and Juliet  | Act 2, Scene 6 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE VI. Friar Laurence's cell. 
 Enter FRIAR LAURENCE and ROMEO  FRIAR LAURENCE  So smile the heavens upon this holy act, 
 That after hours with sorrow chide us not! 
 ROMEO  Amen, amen! but come what sorrow can, 
 It cannot countervail the exchange of joy 
 That one short minute gives me in her sight: 
 Do thou but close our hands with holy words, 
 Then love-devouring death do what he dare; 
 It is enough I may but call her mine. 
 FRIAR LAURENCE  These violent delights have violent ends 
 And in their triumph die, like fire and powder, 
 Which as they kiss consume: the sweetest honey 
 Is loathsome in his own deliciousness 
 And in the taste confounds the appetite: 
 Therefore love moderately; long love doth so; 
 Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow. 

 Enter JULIET  Here comes the lady: O, so light a foot 
 Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint: 
 A lover may bestride the gossamer 
 That idles in the wanton summer air, 
 And yet not fall; so light is vanity. 
 JULIET  Good even to my ghostly confessor. 
 FRIAR LAURENCE  Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both. 
 JULIET  As much to him, else is his thanks too much. 
 ROMEO  Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy 
 Be heap'd like mine and that thy skill be more 
 To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath 
 This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue 
 Unfold the imagined happiness that both 
 Receive in either by this dear encounter. 
 JULIET  Conceit, more rich in matter than in words, 
 Brags of his substance, not of ornament: 
 They are but beggars that can count their worth; 
 But my true love is grown to such excess 
 I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth. 
 FRIAR LAURENCE  Come, come with me, and we will make short work; 
 For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone 
 Till holy church incorporate two in one. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Romeo and Juliet  | Act 2, Scene 6 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 