SCENE I. Padua. A public place. The Taming of the Shrew  Shakespeare homepage  |  Taming of the Shrew  | Act 1, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. Padua. A public place. 
 Enter LUCENTIO and his man TRANIO  LUCENTIO  Tranio, since for the great desire I had 
 To see fair Padua, nursery of arts, 
 I am arrived for fruitful Lombardy, 
 The pleasant garden of great Italy; 
 And by my father's love and leave am arm'd 
 With his good will and thy good company, 
 My trusty servant, well approved in all, 
 Here let us breathe and haply institute 
 A course of learning and ingenious studies. 
 Pisa renown'd for grave citizens 
 Gave me my being and my father first, 
 A merchant of great traffic through the world, 
 Vincetino come of Bentivolii. 
 Vincetino's son brought up in Florence 
 It shall become to serve all hopes conceived, 
 To deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds: 
 And therefore, Tranio, for the time I study, 
 Virtue and that part of philosophy 
 Will I apply that treats of happiness 
 By virtue specially to be achieved. 
 Tell me thy mind; for I have Pisa left 
 And am to Padua come, as he that leaves 
 A shallow plash to plunge him in the deep 
 And with satiety seeks to quench his thirst. 
 TRANIO  Mi perdonato, gentle master mine, 
 I am in all affected as yourself; 
 Glad that you thus continue your resolve 
 To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy. 
 Only, good master, while we do admire 
 This virtue and this moral discipline, 
 Let's be no stoics nor no stocks, I pray; 
 Or so devote to Aristotle's cheques 
 As Ovid be an outcast quite abjured: 
 Balk logic with acquaintance that you have 
 And practise rhetoric in your common talk; 
 Music and poesy use to quicken you; 
 The mathematics and the metaphysics, 
 Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you; 
 No profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en: 
 In brief, sir, study what you most affect. 
 LUCENTIO  Gramercies, Tranio, well dost thou advise. 
 If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore, 
 We could at once put us in readiness, 
 And take a lodging fit to entertain 
 Such friends as time in Padua shall beget. 
 But stay a while: what company is this? 
 TRANIO  Master, some show to welcome us to town. 

 Enter BAPTISTA, KATHARINA, BIANCA, GREMIO, and HORTENSIO. LUCENTIO and TRANIO stand by  BAPTISTA  Gentlemen, importune me no farther, 
 For how I firmly am resolved you know; 
 That is, not bestow my youngest daughter 
 Before I have a husband for the elder: 
 If either of you both love Katharina, 
 Because I know you well and love you well, 
 Leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure. 
 GREMIO  [Aside]  To cart her rather: she's too rough for me. 
 There, There, Hortensio, will you any wife? 
 KATHARINA  I pray you, sir, is it your will 
 To make a stale of me amongst these mates? 
 HORTENSIO  Mates, maid! how mean you that? no mates for you, 
 Unless you were of gentler, milder mould. 
 KATHARINA  I'faith, sir, you shall never need to fear: 
 I wis it is not half way to her heart; 
 But if it were, doubt not her care should be 
 To comb your noddle with a three-legg'd stool 
 And paint your face and use you like a fool. 
 HORTENSIA  From all such devils, good Lord deliver us! 
 GREMIO  And me too, good Lord! 
 TRANIO  Hush, master! here's some good pastime toward: 
 That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward. 
 LUCENTIO  But in the other's silence do I see 
 Maid's mild behavior and sobriety. 
 Peace, Tranio! 
 TRANIO  Well said, master; mum! and gaze your fill. 
 BAPTISTA  Gentlemen, that I may soon make good 
 What I have said, Bianca, get you in: 
 And let it not displease thee, good Bianca, 
 For I will love thee ne'er the less, my girl. 
 KATHARINA  A pretty peat! it is best 
 Put finger in the eye, an she knew why. 
 BIANCA  Sister, content you in my discontent. 
 Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe: 
 My books and instruments shall be my company, 
 On them to took and practise by myself. 
 LUCENTIO  Hark, Tranio! thou may'st hear Minerva speak. 
 HORTENSIO  Signior Baptista, will you be so strange? 
 Sorry am I that our good will effects 
 Bianca's grief. 
 GREMIO  Why will you mew her up, 
 Signior Baptista, for this fiend of hell, 
 And make her bear the penance of her tongue? 
 BAPTISTA  Gentlemen, content ye; I am resolved: 
 Go in, Bianca: 

 Exit BIANCA  And for I know she taketh most delight 
 In music, instruments and poetry, 
 Schoolmasters will I keep within my house, 
 Fit to instruct her youth. If you, Hortensio, 
 Or Signior Gremio, you, know any such, 
 Prefer them hither; for to cunning men 
 I will be very kind, and liberal 
 To mine own children in good bringing up: 
 And so farewell. Katharina, you may stay; 
 For I have more to commune with Bianca. 

 Exit  KATHARINA  Why, and I trust I may go too, may I not? What, 
 shall I be appointed hours; as though, belike, I 
 knew not what to take and what to leave, ha? 

 Exit  GREMIO  You may go to the devil's dam: your gifts are so 
 good, here's none will hold you. Their love is not 
 so great, Hortensio, but we may blow our nails 
 together, and fast it fairly out: our cakes dough on 
 both sides. Farewell: yet for the love I bear my 
 sweet Bianca, if I can by any means light on a fit 
 man to teach her that wherein she delights, I will 
 wish him to her father. 
 HORTENSIO  So will I, Signior Gremio: but a word, I pray. 
 Though the nature of our quarrel yet never brooked 
 parle, know now, upon advice, it toucheth us both, 
 that we may yet again have access to our fair 
 mistress and be happy rivals in Bianco's love, to 
 labour and effect one thing specially. 
 GREMIO  What's that, I pray? 
 HORTENSIO  Marry, sir, to get a husband for her sister. 
 GREMIO  A husband! a devil. 
 HORTENSIO  I say, a husband. 
 GREMIO  I say, a devil. Thinkest thou, Hortensio, though 
 her father be very rich, any man is so very a fool 
 to be married to hell? 
 HORTENSIO  Tush, Gremio, though it pass your patience and mine 
 to endure her loud alarums, why, man, there be good 
 fellows in the world, an a man could light on them, 
 would take her with all faults, and money enough. 
 GREMIO  I cannot tell; but I had as lief take her dowry with 
 this condition, to be whipped at the high cross 
 every morning. 
 HORTENSIO  Faith, as you say, there's small choice in rotten 
 apples. But come; since this bar in law makes us 
 friends, it shall be so far forth friendly 
 maintained all by helping Baptista's eldest daughter 
 to a husband we set his youngest free for a husband, 
 and then have to't a fresh. Sweet Bianca! Happy man 
 be his dole! He that runs fastest gets the ring. 
 How say you, Signior Gremio? 
 GREMIO  I am agreed; and would I had given him the best 
 horse in Padua to begin his wooing that would 
 thoroughly woo her, wed her and bed her and rid the 
 house of her! Come on. 

 Exeunt GREMIO and HORTENSIO  TRANIO  I pray, sir, tell me, is it possible 
 That love should of a sudden take such hold? 
 LUCENTIO  O Tranio, till I found it to be true, 
 I never thought it possible or likely; 
 But see, while idly I stood looking on, 
 I found the effect of love in idleness: 
 And now in plainness do confess to thee, 
 That art to me as secret and as dear 
 As Anna to the queen of Carthage was, 
 Tranio, I burn, I pine, I perish, Tranio, 
 If I achieve not this young modest girl. 
 Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst; 
 Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt. 
 TRANIO  Master, it is no time to chide you now; 
 Affection is not rated from the heart: 
 If love have touch'd you, nought remains but so, 
 'Redime te captum quam queas minimo.' 
 LUCENTIO  Gramercies, lad, go forward; this contents: 
 The rest will comfort, for thy counsel's sound. 
 TRANIO  Master, you look'd so longly on the maid, 
 Perhaps you mark'd not what's the pith of all. 
 LUCENTIO  O yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face, 
 Such as the daughter of Agenor had, 
 That made great Jove to humble him to her hand. 
 When with his knees he kiss'd the Cretan strand. 
 TRANIO  Saw you no more? mark'd you not how her sister 
 Began to scold and raise up such a storm 
 That mortal ears might hardly endure the din? 
 LUCENTIO  Tranio, I saw her coral lips to move 
 And with her breath she did perfume the air: 
 Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her. 
 TRANIO  Nay, then, 'tis time to stir him from his trance. 
 I pray, awake, sir: if you love the maid, 
 Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her. Thus it stands: 
 Her eldest sister is so curst and shrewd 
 That till the father rid his hands of her, 
 Master, your love must live a maid at home; 
 And therefore has he closely mew'd her up, 
 Because she will not be annoy'd with suitors. 
 LUCENTIO  Ah, Tranio, what a cruel father's he! 
 But art thou not advised, he took some care 
 To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her? 
 TRANIO  Ay, marry, am I, sir; and now 'tis plotted. 
 LUCENTIO  I have it, Tranio. 
 TRANIO  Master, for my hand, 
 Both our inventions meet and jump in one. 
 LUCENTIO  Tell me thine first. 
 TRANIO  You will be schoolmaster 
 And undertake the teaching of the maid: 
 That's your device. 
 LUCENTIO  It is: may it be done? 
 TRANIO  Not possible; for who shall bear your part, 
 And be in Padua here Vincentio's son, 
 Keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends, 
 Visit his countrymen and banquet them? 
 LUCENTIO  Basta; content thee, for I have it full. 
 We have not yet been seen in any house, 
 Nor can we lie distinguish'd by our faces 
 For man or master; then it follows thus; 
 Thou shalt be master, Tranio, in my stead, 
 Keep house and port and servants as I should: 
 I will some other be, some Florentine, 
 Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa. 
 'Tis hatch'd and shall be so: Tranio, at once 
 Uncase thee; take my colour'd hat and cloak: 
 When Biondello comes, he waits on thee; 
 But I will charm him first to keep his tongue. 
 TRANIO  So had you need. 
 In brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is, 
 And I am tied to be obedient; 
 For so your father charged me at our parting, 
 'Be serviceable to my son,' quoth he, 
 Although I think 'twas in another sense; 
 I am content to be Lucentio, 
 Because so well I love Lucentio. 
 LUCENTIO  Tranio, be so, because Lucentio loves: 
 And let me be a slave, to achieve that maid 
 Whose sudden sight hath thrall'd my wounded eye. 
 Here comes the rogue. 

 Enter BIONDELLO  Sirrah, where have you been? 
 BIONDELLO  Where have I been! Nay, how now! where are you? 
 Master, has my fellow Tranio stolen your clothes? Or 
 you stolen his? or both? pray, what's the news? 
 LUCENTIO  Sirrah, come hither: 'tis no time to jest, 
 And therefore frame your manners to the time. 
 Your fellow Tranio here, to save my life, 
 Puts my apparel and my countenance on, 
 And I for my escape have put on his; 
 For in a quarrel since I came ashore 
 I kill'd a man and fear I was descried: 
 Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes, 
 While I make way from hence to save my life: 
 You understand me? 
 BIONDELLO  I, sir! ne'er a whit. 
 LUCENTIO  And not a jot of Tranio in your mouth: 
 Tranio is changed into Lucentio. 
 BIONDELLO  The better for him: would I were so too! 
 TRANIO  So could I, faith, boy, to have the next wish after, 
 That Lucentio indeed had Baptista's youngest daughter. 
 But, sirrah, not for my sake, but your master's, I advise 
 You use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies: 
 When I am alone, why, then I am Tranio; 
 But in all places else your master Lucentio. 
 LUCENTIO  Tranio, let's go: one thing more rests, that 
 thyself execute, to make one among these wooers: if 
 thou ask me why, sufficeth, my reasons are both good 
 and weighty. 

 Exeunt 
 The presenters above speak  First Servant  My lord, you nod; you do not mind the play. 
 SLY  Yes, by Saint Anne, do I. A good matter, surely: 
 comes there any more of it? 
 Page  My lord, 'tis but begun. 
 SLY  'Tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady: 
 would 'twere done! 

 They sit and mark  Shakespeare homepage  |  Taming of the Shrew  | Act 1, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 