SCENE I. Before PROSPERO'S cell. The Tempest  Shakespeare homepage  |  The Tempest  | Act 5, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  SCENE I. Before PROSPERO'S cell. 
 Enter PROSPERO in his magic robes, and ARIEL  PROSPERO  Now does my project gather to a head: 
 My charms crack not; my spirits obey; and time 
 Goes upright with his carriage. How's the day? 
 ARIEL  On the sixth hour; at which time, my lord, 
 You said our work should cease. 
 PROSPERO  I did say so, 
 When first I raised the tempest. Say, my spirit, 
 How fares the king and's followers? 
 ARIEL  Confined together 
 In the same fashion as you gave in charge, 
 Just as you left them; all prisoners, sir, 
 In the line-grove which weather-fends your cell; 
 They cannot budge till your release. The king, 
 His brother and yours, abide all three distracted 
 And the remainder mourning over them, 
 Brimful of sorrow and dismay; but chiefly 
 Him that you term'd, sir, 'The good old lord Gonzalo;' 
 His tears run down his beard, like winter's drops 
 From eaves of reeds. Your charm so strongly works 'em 
 That if you now beheld them, your affections 
 Would become tender. 
 PROSPERO  Dost thou think so, spirit? 
 ARIEL  Mine would, sir, were I human. 
 PROSPERO  And mine shall. 
 Hast thou, which art but air, a touch, a feeling 
 Of their afflictions, and shall not myself, 
 One of their kind, that relish all as sharply, 
 Passion as they, be kindlier moved than thou art? 
 Though with their high wrongs I am struck to the quick, 
 Yet with my nobler reason 'gaitist my fury 
 Do I take part: the rarer action is 
 In virtue than in vengeance: they being penitent, 
 The sole drift of my purpose doth extend 
 Not a frown further. Go release them, Ariel: 
 My charms I'll break, their senses I'll restore, 
 And they shall be themselves. 
 ARIEL  I'll fetch them, sir. 

 Exit  PROSPERO  Ye elves of hills, brooks, standing lakes and groves, 
 And ye that on the sands with printless foot 
 Do chase the ebbing Neptune and do fly him 
 When he comes back; you demi-puppets that 
 By moonshine do the green sour ringlets make, 
 Whereof the ewe not bites, and you whose pastime 
 Is to make midnight mushrooms, that rejoice 
 To hear the solemn curfew; by whose aid, 
 Weak masters though ye be, I have bedimm'd 
 The noontide sun, call'd forth the mutinous winds, 
 And 'twixt the green sea and the azured vault 
 Set roaring war: to the dread rattling thunder 
 Have I given fire and rifted Jove's stout oak 
 With his own bolt; the strong-based promontory 
 Have I made shake and by the spurs pluck'd up 
 The pine and cedar: graves at my command 
 Have waked their sleepers, oped, and let 'em forth 
 By my so potent art. But this rough magic 
 I here abjure, and, when I have required 
 Some heavenly music, which even now I do, 
 To work mine end upon their senses that 
 This airy charm is for, I'll break my staff, 
 Bury it certain fathoms in the earth, 
 And deeper than did ever plummet sound 
 I'll drown my book. 

 Solemn music 
 Re-enter ARIEL before: then ALONSO, with a  frantic gesture, attended by GONZALO;  SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO in like manner,  attended by ADRIAN and FRANCISCO   they all  enter the circle which PROSPERO had made,  and there stand charmed; which PROSPERO observing, speaks:  A solemn air and the best comforter 
 To an unsettled fancy cure thy brains, 
 Now useless, boil'd within thy skull! There stand, 
 For you are spell-stopp'd. 
 Holy Gonzalo, honourable man, 
 Mine eyes, even sociable to the show of thine, 
 Fall fellowly drops. The charm dissolves apace, 
 And as the morning steals upon the night, 
 Melting the darkness, so their rising senses 
 Begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle 
 Their clearer reason. O good Gonzalo, 
 My true preserver, and a loyal sir 
 To him you follow'st! I will pay thy graces 
 Home both in word and deed. Most cruelly 
 Didst thou, Alonso, use me and my daughter: 
 Thy brother was a furtherer in the act. 
 Thou art pinch'd fort now, Sebastian. Flesh and blood, 
 You, brother mine, that entertain'd ambition, 
 Expell'd remorse and nature; who, with Sebastian, 
 Whose inward pinches therefore are most strong, 
 Would here have kill'd your king; I do forgive thee, 
 Unnatural though thou art. Their understanding 
 Begins to swell, and the approaching tide 
 Will shortly fill the reasonable shore 
 That now lies foul and muddy. Not one of them 
 That yet looks on me, or would know me Ariel, 
 Fetch me the hat and rapier in my cell: 
 I will discase me, and myself present 
 As I was sometime Milan: quickly, spirit; 
 Thou shalt ere long be free. 

 ARIEL sings and helps to attire him  Where the bee sucks. there suck I: 
 In a cowslip's bell I lie; 
 There I couch when owls do cry. 
 On the bat's back I do fly 
 After summer merrily. 
 Merrily, merrily shall I live now 
 Under the blossom that hangs on the bough. 
 PROSPERO  Why, that's my dainty Ariel! I shall miss thee: 
 But yet thou shalt have freedom: so, so, so. 
 To the king's ship, invisible as thou art: 
 There shalt thou find the mariners asleep 
 Under the hatches; the master and the boatswain 
 Being awake, enforce them to this place, 
 And presently, I prithee. 
 ARIEL  I drink the air before me, and return 
 Or ere your pulse twice beat. 

 Exit  GONZALO  All torment, trouble, wonder and amazement 
 Inhabits here: some heavenly power guide us 
 Out of this fearful country! 
 PROSPERO  Behold, sir king, 
 The wronged Duke of Milan, Prospero: 
 For more assurance that a living prince 
 Does now speak to thee, I embrace thy body; 
 And to thee and thy company I bid 
 A hearty welcome. 
 ALONSO  Whether thou best he or no, 
 Or some enchanted trifle to abuse me, 
 As late I have been, I not know: thy pulse 
 Beats as of flesh and blood; and, since I saw thee, 
 The affliction of my mind amends, with which, 
 I fear, a madness held me: this must crave, 
 An if this be at all, a most strange story. 
 Thy dukedom I resign and do entreat 
 Thou pardon me my wrongs. But how should Prospero 
 Be living and be here? 
 PROSPERO  First, noble friend, 
 Let me embrace thine age, whose honour cannot 
 Be measured or confined. 
 GONZALO  Whether this be 
 Or be not, I'll not swear. 
 PROSPERO  You do yet taste 
 Some subtilties o' the isle, that will not let you 
 Believe things certain. Welcome, my friends all! 

 Aside to SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO  But you, my brace of lords, were I so minded, 
 I here could pluck his highness' frown upon you 
 And justify you traitors: at this time 
 I will tell no tales. 
 SEBASTIAN  [Aside]  The devil speaks in him. 
 PROSPERO  No. 
 For you, most wicked sir, whom to call brother 
 Would even infect my mouth, I do forgive 
 Thy rankest fault; all of them; and require 
 My dukedom of thee, which perforce, I know, 
 Thou must restore. 
 ALONSO  If thou be'st Prospero, 
 Give us particulars of thy preservation; 
 How thou hast met us here, who three hours since 
 Were wreck'd upon this shore; where I have lost-- 
 How sharp the point of this remembrance is!-- 
 My dear son Ferdinand. 
 PROSPERO  I am woe for't, sir. 
 ALONSO  Irreparable is the loss, and patience 
 Says it is past her cure. 
 PROSPERO  I rather think 
 You have not sought her help, of whose soft grace 
 For the like loss I have her sovereign aid 
 And rest myself content. 
 ALONSO  You the like loss! 
 PROSPERO  As great to me as late; and, supportable 
 To make the dear loss, have I means much weaker 
 Than you may call to comfort you, for I 
 Have lost my daughter. 
 ALONSO  A daughter? 
 O heavens, that they were living both in Naples, 
 The king and queen there! that they were, I wish 
 Myself were mudded in that oozy bed 
 Where my son lies. When did you lose your daughter? 
 PROSPERO  In this last tempest. I perceive these lords 
 At this encounter do so much admire 
 That they devour their reason and scarce think 
 Their eyes do offices of truth, their words 
 Are natural breath: but, howsoe'er you have 
 Been justled from your senses, know for certain 
 That I am Prospero and that very duke 
 Which was thrust forth of Milan, who most strangely 
 Upon this shore, where you were wreck'd, was landed, 
 To be the lord on't. No more yet of this; 
 For 'tis a chronicle of day by day, 
 Not a relation for a breakfast nor 
 Befitting this first meeting. Welcome, sir; 
 This cell's my court: here have I few attendants 
 And subjects none abroad: pray you, look in. 
 My dukedom since you have given me again, 
 I will requite you with as good a thing; 
 At least bring forth a wonder, to content ye 
 As much as me my dukedom. 

 Here PROSPERO discovers FERDINAND and MIRANDA playing at chess  MIRANDA  Sweet lord, you play me false. 
 FERDINAND  No, my dear'st love, 
 I would not for the world. 
 MIRANDA  Yes, for a score of kingdoms you should wrangle, 
 And I would call it, fair play. 
 ALONSO  If this prove 
 A vision of the Island, one dear son 
 Shall I twice lose. 
 SEBASTIAN  A most high miracle! 
 FERDINAND  Though the seas threaten, they are merciful; 
 I have cursed them without cause. 

 Kneels  ALONSO  Now all the blessings 
 Of a glad father compass thee about! 
 Arise, and say how thou camest here. 
 MIRANDA  O, wonder! 
 How many goodly creatures are there here! 
 How beauteous mankind is! O brave new world, 
 That has such people in't! 
 PROSPERO  'Tis new to thee. 
 ALONSO  What is this maid with whom thou wast at play? 
 Your eld'st acquaintance cannot be three hours: 
 Is she the goddess that hath sever'd us, 
 And brought us thus together? 
 FERDINAND  Sir, she is mortal; 
 But by immortal Providence she's mine: 
 I chose her when I could not ask my father 
 For his advice, nor thought I had one. She 
 Is daughter to this famous Duke of Milan, 
 Of whom so often I have heard renown, 
 But never saw before; of whom I have 
 Received a second life; and second father 
 This lady makes him to me. 
 ALONSO  I am hers: 
 But, O, how oddly will it sound that I 
 Must ask my child forgiveness! 
 PROSPERO  There, sir, stop: 
 Let us not burthen our remembrance with 
 A heaviness that's gone. 
 GONZALO  I have inly wept, 
 Or should have spoke ere this. Look down, you god, 
 And on this couple drop a blessed crown! 
 For it is you that have chalk'd forth the way 
 Which brought us hither. 
 ALONSO  I say, Amen, Gonzalo! 
 GONZALO  Was Milan thrust from Milan, that his issue 
 Should become kings of Naples? O, rejoice 
 Beyond a common joy, and set it down 
 With gold on lasting pillars: In one voyage 
 Did Claribel her husband find at Tunis, 
 And Ferdinand, her brother, found a wife 
 Where he himself was lost, Prospero his dukedom 
 In a poor isle and all of us ourselves 
 When no man was his own. 
 ALONSO  [To FERDINAND and MIRANDA]  Give me your hands: 
 Let grief and sorrow still embrace his heart 
 That doth not wish you joy! 
 GONZALO  Be it so! Amen! 

 Re-enter ARIEL, with the Master and Boatswain amazedly following  O, look, sir, look, sir! here is more of us: 
 I prophesied, if a gallows were on land, 
 This fellow could not drown. Now, blasphemy, 
 That swear'st grace o'erboard, not an oath on shore? 
 Hast thou no mouth by land? What is the news? 
 Boatswain  The best news is, that we have safely found 
 Our king and company; the next, our ship-- 
 Which, but three glasses since, we gave out split-- 
 Is tight and yare and bravely rigg'd as when 
 We first put out to sea. 
 ARIEL  [Aside to PROSPERO]  Sir, all this service 
 Have I done since I went. 
 PROSPERO  [Aside to ARIEL]  My tricksy spirit! 
 ALONSO  These are not natural events; they strengthen 
 From strange to stranger. Say, how came you hither? 
 Boatswain  If I did think, sir, I were well awake, 
 I'ld strive to tell you. We were dead of sleep, 
 And--how we know not--all clapp'd under hatches; 
 Where but even now with strange and several noises 
 Of roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling chains, 
 And more diversity of sounds, all horrible, 
 We were awaked; straightway, at liberty; 
 Where we, in all her trim, freshly beheld 
 Our royal, good and gallant ship, our master 
 Capering to eye her: on a trice, so please you, 
 Even in a dream, were we divided from them 
 And were brought moping hither. 
 ARIEL  [Aside to PROSPERO]          Was't well done? 
 PROSPERO  [Aside to ARIEL]  Bravely, my diligence. Thou shalt be free. 
 ALONSO  This is as strange a maze as e'er men trod 
 And there is in this business more than nature 
 Was ever conduct of: some oracle 
 Must rectify our knowledge. 
 PROSPERO  Sir, my liege, 
 Do not infest your mind with beating on 
 The strangeness of this business; at pick'd leisure 
 Which shall be shortly, single I'll resolve you, 
 Which to you shall seem probable, of every 
 These happen'd accidents; till when, be cheerful 
 And think of each thing well. 

 Aside to ARIEL  Come hither, spirit: 
 Set Caliban and his companions free; 
 Untie the spell. 

 Exit ARIEL  How fares my gracious sir? 
 There are yet missing of your company 
 Some few odd lads that you remember not. 

 Re-enter ARIEL, driving in CALIBAN, STEPHANO and TRINCULO, in their stolen apparel  STEPHANO  Every man shift for all the rest, and 
 let no man take care for himself; for all is 
 but fortune. Coragio, bully-monster, coragio! 
 TRINCULO  If these be true spies which I wear in my head, 
 here's a goodly sight. 
 CALIBAN  O Setebos, these be brave spirits indeed! 
 How fine my master is! I am afraid 
 He will chastise me. 
 SEBASTIAN  Ha, ha! 
 What things are these, my lord Antonio? 
 Will money buy 'em? 
 ANTONIO  Very like; one of them 
 Is a plain fish, and, no doubt, marketable. 
 PROSPERO  Mark but the badges of these men, my lords, 
 Then say if they be true. This mis-shapen knave, 
 His mother was a witch, and one so strong 
 That could control the moon, make flows and ebbs, 
 And deal in her command without her power. 
 These three have robb'd me; and this demi-devil-- 
 For he's a bastard one--had plotted with them 
 To take my life. Two of these fellows you 
 Must know and own; this thing of darkness! 
 Acknowledge mine. 
 CALIBAN  I shall be pinch'd to death. 
 ALONSO  Is not this Stephano, my drunken butler? 
 SEBASTIAN  He is drunk now: where had he wine? 
 ALONSO  And Trinculo is reeling ripe: where should they 
 Find this grand liquor that hath gilded 'em? 
 How camest thou in this pickle? 
 TRINCULO  I have been in such a pickle since I 
 saw you last that, I fear me, will never out of 
 my bones: I shall not fear fly-blowing. 
 SEBASTIAN  Why, how now, Stephano! 
 STEPHANO  O, touch me not; I am not Stephano, but a cramp. 
 PROSPERO  You'ld be king o' the isle, sirrah? 
 STEPHANO  I should have been a sore one then. 
 ALONSO  This is a strange thing as e'er I look'd on. 

 Pointing to Caliban  PROSPERO  He is as disproportion'd in his manners 
 As in his shape. Go, sirrah, to my cell; 
 Take with you your companions; as you look 
 To have my pardon, trim it handsomely. 
 CALIBAN  Ay, that I will; and I'll be wise hereafter 
 And seek for grace. What a thrice-double ass 
 Was I, to take this drunkard for a god 
 And worship this dull fool! 
 PROSPERO  Go to; away! 
 ALONSO  Hence, and bestow your luggage where you found it. 
 SEBASTIAN  Or stole it, rather. 

 Exeunt CALIBAN, STEPHANO, and TRINCULO  PROSPERO  Sir, I invite your highness and your train 
 To my poor cell, where you shall take your rest 
 For this one night; which, part of it, I'll waste 
 With such discourse as, I not doubt, shall make it 
 Go quick away; the story of my life 
 And the particular accidents gone by 
 Since I came to this isle: and in the morn 
 I'll bring you to your ship and so to Naples, 
 Where I have hope to see the nuptial 
 Of these our dear-beloved solemnized; 
 And thence retire me to my Milan, where 
 Every third thought shall be my grave. 
 ALONSO  I long 
 To hear the story of your life, which must 
 Take the ear strangely. 
 PROSPERO  I'll deliver all; 
 And promise you calm seas, auspicious gales 
 And sail so expeditious that shall catch 
 Your royal fleet far off. 

 Aside to ARIEL  My Ariel, chick, 
 That is thy charge: then to the elements 
 Be free, and fare thou well! Please you, draw near. 

 Exeunt  EPILOGUE 
 SPOKEN BY PROSPERO 
 Now my charms are all o'erthrown, 
 And what strength I have's mine own, 
 Which is most faint: now, 'tis true, 
 I must be here confined by you, 
 Or sent to Naples. Let me not, 
 Since I have my dukedom got 
 And pardon'd the deceiver, dwell 
 In this bare island by your spell; 
 But release me from my bands 
 With the help of your good hands: 
 Gentle breath of yours my sails 
 Must fill, or else my project fails, 
 Which was to please. Now I want 
 Spirits to enforce, art to enchant, 
 And my ending is despair, 
 Unless I be relieved by prayer, 
 Which pierces so that it assaults 
 Mercy itself and frees all faults. 
 As you from crimes would pardon'd be, 
 Let your indulgence set me free. 
