SCENE I. A room in Lucullus' house. Timon of Athens  Shakespeare homepage  |  Timon of Athens  | Act 3, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. A room in Lucullus' house. 
 FLAMINIUS waiting. Enter a Servant to him  Servant  I have told my lord of you; he is coming down to you. 
 FLAMINIUS  I thank you, sir. 

 Enter LUCULLUS  Servant  Here's my lord. 
 LUCULLUS  [Aside]  One of Lord Timon's men? a gift, I 
 warrant. Why, this hits right; I dreamt of a silver 
 basin and ewer to-night. Flaminius, honest 
 Flaminius; you are very respectively welcome, sir. 
 Fill me some wine. 

 Exit Servants  And how does that honourable, complete, free-hearted 
 gentleman of Athens, thy very bountiful good lord 
 and master? 
 FLAMINIUS  His health is well sir. 
 LUCULLUS  I am right glad that his health is well, sir: and 
 what hast thou there under thy cloak, pretty Flaminius? 
 FLAMINIUS  'Faith, nothing but an empty box, sir; which, in my 
 lord's behalf, I come to entreat your honour to 
 supply; who, having great and instant occasion to 
 use fifty talents, hath sent to your lordship to 
 furnish him, nothing doubting your present 
 assistance therein. 
 LUCULLUS  La, la, la, la! 'nothing doubting,' says he? Alas, 
 good lord! a noble gentleman 'tis, if he would not 
 keep so good a house. Many a time and often I ha' 
 dined with him, and told him on't, and come again to 
 supper to him, of purpose to have him spend less, 
 and yet he would embrace no counsel, take no warning 
 by my coming. Every man has his fault, and honesty 
 is his: I ha' told him on't, but I could ne'er get 
 him from't. 

 Re-enter Servant, with wine  Servant  Please your lordship, here is the wine. 
 LUCULLUS  Flaminius, I have noted thee always wise. Here's to thee. 
 FLAMINIUS  Your lordship speaks your pleasure. 
 LUCULLUS  I have observed thee always for a towardly prompt 
 spirit--give thee thy due--and one that knows what 
 belongs to reason; and canst use the time well, if 
 the time use thee well: good parts in thee. 

 To Servant  Get you gone, sirrah. 

 Exit Servant  Draw nearer, honest Flaminius. Thy lord's a 
 bountiful gentleman: but thou art wise; and thou 
 knowest well enough, although thou comest to me, 
 that this is no time to lend money, especially upon 
 bare friendship, without security. Here's three 
 solidares for thee: good boy, wink at me, and say 
 thou sawest me not. Fare thee well. 
 FLAMINIUS  Is't possible the world should so much differ, 
 And we alive that lived? Fly, damned baseness, 
 To him that worships thee! 

 Throwing the money back  LUCULLUS  Ha! now I see thou art a fool, and fit for thy master. 

 Exit  FLAMINIUS  May these add to the number that may scald thee! 
 Let moulten coin be thy damnation, 
 Thou disease of a friend, and not himself! 
 Has friendship such a faint and milky heart, 
 It turns in less than two nights? O you gods, 
 I feel master's passion! this slave, 
 Unto his honour, has my lord's meat in him: 
 Why should it thrive and turn to nutriment, 
 When he is turn'd to poison? 
 O, may diseases only work upon't! 
 And, when he's sick to death, let not that part of nature 
 Which my lord paid for, be of any power 
 To expel sickness, but prolong his hour! 

 Exit  Shakespeare homepage  |  Timon of Athens  | Act 3, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 