SCENE IV. Before the walls of Athens. Timon of Athens  Shakespeare homepage  |  Timon of Athens  | Act 5, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  SCENE IV. Before the walls of Athens. 
 Trumpets sound. Enter ALCIBIADES with his powers  ALCIBIADES  Sound to this coward and lascivious town 
 Our terrible approach. 

 A parley sounded 
 Enter Senators on the walls  Till now you have gone on and fill'd the time 
 With all licentious measure, making your wills 
 The scope of justice; till now myself and such 
 As slept within the shadow of your power 
 Hav e wander'd with our traversed arms and breathed 
 Our sufferance vainly: now the time is flush, 
 When crouching marrow in the bearer strong 
 Cries of itself 'No more:' now breathless wrong 
 Shall sit and pant in your great chairs of ease, 
 And pursy insolence shall break his wind 
 With fear and horrid flight. 
 First Senator  Noble and young, 
 When thy first griefs were but a mere conceit, 
 Ere thou hadst power or we had cause of fear, 
 We sent to thee, to give thy rages balm, 
 To wipe out our ingratitude with loves 
 Above their quantity. 
 Second Senator  So did we woo 
 Transformed Timon to our city's love 
 By humble message and by promised means: 
 We were not all unkind, nor all deserve 
 The common stroke of war. 
 First Senator  These walls of ours 
 Were not erected by their hands from whom 
 You have received your griefs; nor are they such 
 That these great towers, trophies and schools 
 should fall 
 For private faults in them. 
 Second Senator  Nor are they living 
 Who were the motives that you first went out; 
 Shame that they wanted cunning, in excess 
 Hath broke their hearts. March, noble lord, 
 Into our city with thy banners spread: 
 By decimation, and a tithed death-- 
 If thy revenges hunger for that food 
 Which nature loathes--take thou the destined tenth, 
 And by the hazard of the spotted die 
 Let die the spotted. 
 First Senator  All have not offended; 
 For those that were, it is not square to take 
 On those that are, revenges: crimes, like lands, 
 Are not inherited. Then, dear countryman, 
 Bring in thy ranks, but leave without thy rage: 
 Spare thy Athenian cradle and those kin 
 Which in the bluster of thy wrath must fall 
 With those that have offended: like a shepherd, 
 Approach the fold and cull the infected forth, 
 But kill not all together. 
 Second Senator  What thou wilt, 
 Thou rather shalt enforce it with thy smile 
 Than hew to't with thy sword. 
 First Senator  Set but thy foot 
 Against our rampired gates, and they shall ope; 
 So thou wilt send thy gentle heart before, 
 To say thou'lt enter friendly. 
 Second Senator  Throw thy glove, 
 Or any token of thine honour else, 
 That thou wilt use the wars as thy redress 
 And not as our confusion, all thy powers 
 Shall make their harbour in our town, till we 
 Have seal'd thy full desire. 
 ALCIBIADES  Then there's my glove; 
 Descend, and open your uncharged ports: 
 Those enemies of Timon's and mine own 
 Whom you yourselves shall set out for reproof 
 Fall and no more: and, to atone your fears 
 With my more noble meaning, not a man 
 Shall pass his quarter, or offend the stream 
 Of regular justice in your city's bounds, 
 But shall be render'd to your public laws 
 At heaviest answer. 
 Both  'Tis most nobly spoken. 
 ALCIBIADES  Descend, and keep your words. 

 The Senators descend, and open the gates 
 Enter Soldier  Soldier  My noble general, Timon is dead; 
 Entomb'd upon the very hem o' the sea; 
 And on his grave-stone this insculpture, which 
 With wax I brought away, whose soft impression 
 Interprets for my poor ignorance. 
 ALCIBIADES  [Reads the epitaph]  'Here lies a 
 wretched corse, of wretched soul bereft: 
 Seek not my name: a plague consume you wicked 
 caitiffs left! 
 Here lie I, Timon; who, alive, all living men did hate: 
 Pass by and curse thy fill, but pass and stay 
 not here thy gait.' 
 These well express in thee thy latter spirits: 
 Though thou abhorr'dst in us our human griefs, 
 Scorn'dst our brain's flow and those our 
 droplets which 
 From niggard nature fall, yet rich conceit 
 Taught thee to make vast Neptune weep for aye 
 On thy low grave, on faults forgiven. Dead 
 Is noble Timon: of whose memory 
 Hereafter more. Bring me into your city, 
 And I will use the olive with my sword, 
 Make war breed peace, make peace stint war, make each 
 Prescribe to other as each other's leech. 
 Let our drums strike. 

 Exeunt 