SCENE I. Without the walls of Athens. Timon of Athens  Shakespeare homepage  |  Timon of Athens  | Act 4, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. Without the walls of Athens. 
 Enter TIMON  TIMON  Let me look back upon thee. O thou wall, 
 That girdlest in those wolves, dive in the earth, 
 And fence not Athens! Matrons, turn incontinent! 
 Obedience fail in children! slaves and fools, 
 Pluck the grave wrinkled senate from the bench, 
 And minister in their steads! to general filths 
 Convert o' the instant, green virginity, 
 Do 't in your parents' eyes! bankrupts, hold fast; 
 Rather than render back, out with your knives, 
 And cut your trusters' throats! bound servants, steal! 
 Large-handed robbers your grave masters are, 
 And pill by law. Maid, to thy master's bed; 
 Thy mistress is o' the brothel! Son of sixteen, 
 pluck the lined crutch from thy old limping sire, 
 With it beat out his brains! Piety, and fear, 
 Religion to the gods, peace, justice, truth, 
 Domestic awe, night-rest, and neighbourhood, 
 Instruction, manners, mysteries, and trades, 
 Degrees, observances, customs, and laws, 
 Decline to your confounding contraries, 
 And let confusion live! Plagues, incident to men, 
 Your potent and infectious fevers heap 
 On Athens, ripe for stroke! Thou cold sciatica, 
 Cripple our senators, that their limbs may halt 
 As lamely as their manners. Lust and liberty 
 Creep in the minds and marrows of our youth, 
 That 'gainst the stream of virtue they may strive, 
 And drown themselves in riot! Itches, blains, 
 Sow all the Athenian bosoms; and their crop 
 Be general leprosy! Breath infect breath, 
 at their society, as their friendship, may 
 merely poison! Nothing I'll bear from thee, 
 But nakedness, thou detestable town! 
 Take thou that too, with multiplying bans! 
 Timon will to the woods; where he shall find 
 The unkindest beast more kinder than mankind. 
 The gods confound--hear me, you good gods all-- 
 The Athenians both within and out that wall! 
 And grant, as Timon grows, his hate may grow 
 To the whole race of mankind, high and low! Amen. 

 Exit  Shakespeare homepage  |  Timon of Athens  | Act 4, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 