SCENE II. A public place. Timon of Athens  Shakespeare homepage  |  Timon of Athens  | Act 3, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. A public place. 
 Enter LUCILIUS, with three Strangers  LUCILIUS  Who, the Lord Timon? he is my very good friend, and 
 an honourable gentleman. 
 First Stranger  We know him for no less, though we are but strangers 
 to him. But I can tell you one thing, my lord, and 
 which I hear from common rumours: now Lord Timon's 
 happy hours are done and past, and his estate 
 shrinks from him. 
 LUCILIUS  Fie, no, do not believe it; he cannot want for money. 
 Second Stranger  But believe you this, my lord, that, not long ago, 
 one of his men was with the Lord Lucullus to borrow 
 so many talents, nay, urged extremely for't and 
 showed what necessity belonged to't, and yet was denied. 
 LUCILIUS  How! 
 Second Stranger  I tell you, denied, my lord. 
 LUCILIUS  What a strange case was that! now, before the gods, 
 I am ashamed on't. Denied that honourable man! 
 there was very little honour showed in't. For my own 
 part, I must needs confess, I have received some 
 small kindnesses from him, as money, plate, jewels 
 and such-like trifles, nothing comparing to his; 
 yet, had he mistook him and sent to me, I should 
 ne'er have denied his occasion so many talents. 

 Enter SERVILIUS  SERVILIUS  See, by good hap, yonder's my lord; 
 I have sweat to see his honour. My honoured lord,-- 

 To LUCIUS  LUCILIUS  Servilius! you are kindly met, sir. Fare thee well: 
 commend me to thy honourable virtuous lord, my very 
 exquisite friend. 
 SERVILIUS  May it please your honour, my lord hath sent-- 
 LUCILIUS  Ha! what has he sent? I am so much endeared to 
 that lord; he's ever sending: how shall I thank 
 him, thinkest thou? And what has he sent now? 
 SERVILIUS  Has only sent his present occasion now, my lord; 
 requesting your lordship to supply his instant use 
 with so many talents. 
 LUCILIUS  I know his lordship is but merry with me; 
 He cannot want fifty five hundred talents. 
 SERVILIUS  But in the mean time he wants less, my lord. 
 If his occasion were not virtuous, 
 I should not urge it half so faithfully. 
 LUCILIUS  Dost thou speak seriously, Servilius? 
 SERVILIUS  Upon my soul,'tis true, sir. 
 LUCILIUS  What a wicked beast was I to disfurnish myself 
 against such a good time, when I might ha' shown 
 myself honourable! how unluckily it happened, that I 
 should purchase the day before for a little part, 
 and undo a great deal of honoured! Servilius, now, 
 before the gods, I am not able to do,--the more 
 beast, I say:--I was sending to use Lord Timon 
 myself, these gentlemen can witness! but I would 
 not, for the wealth of Athens, I had done't now. 
 Commend me bountifully to his good lordship; and I 
 hope his honour will conceive the fairest of me, 
 because I have no power to be kind: and tell him 
 this from me, I count it one of my greatest 
 afflictions, say, that I cannot pleasure such an 
 honourable gentleman. Good Servilius, will you 
 befriend me so far, as to use mine own words to him? 
 SERVILIUS  Yes, sir, I shall. 
 LUCILIUS  I'll look you out a good turn, Servilius. 

 Exit SERVILIUS  True as you said, Timon is shrunk indeed; 
 And he that's once denied will hardly speed. 

 Exit  First Stranger  Do you observe this, Hostilius? 
 Second Stranger  Ay, too well. 
 First Stranger  Why, this is the world's soul; and just of the 
 same piece 
 Is every flatterer's spirit. Who can call him 
 His friend that dips in the same dish? for, in 
 My knowing, Timon has been this lord's father, 
 And kept his credit with his purse, 
 Supported his estate; nay, Timon's money 
 Has paid his men their wages: he ne'er drinks, 
 But Timon's silver treads upon his lip; 
 And yet--O, see the monstrousness of man 
 When he looks out in an ungrateful shape!-- 
 He does deny him, in respect of his, 
 What charitable men afford to beggars. 
 Third Stranger  Religion groans at it. 
 First Stranger  For mine own part, 
 I never tasted Timon in my life, 
 Nor came any of his bounties over me, 
 To mark me for his friend; yet, I protest, 
 For his right noble mind, illustrious virtue 
 And honourable carriage, 
 Had his necessity made use of me, 
 I would have put my wealth into donation, 
 And the best half should have return'd to him, 
 So much I love his heart: but, I perceive, 
 Men must learn now with pity to dispense; 
 For policy sits above conscience. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Timon of Athens  | Act 3, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 