SCENE III. A room in Sempronius' house. Timon of Athens  Shakespeare homepage  |  Timon of Athens  | Act 3, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. A room in Sempronius' house. 
 Enter SEMPRONIUS, and a Servant of TIMON's  SEMPRONIUS  Must he needs trouble me in 't,--hum!--'bove 
 all others? 
 He might have tried Lord Lucius or Lucullus; 
 And now Ventidius is wealthy too, 
 Whom he redeem'd from prison: all these 
 Owe their estates unto him. 
 Servant  My lord, 
 They have all been touch'd and found base metal, for 
 They have au denied him. 
 SEMPRONIUS  How! have they denied him? 
 Has Ventidius and Lucullus denied him? 
 And does he send to me? Three? hum! 
 It shows but little love or judgment in him: 
 Must I be his last refuge! His friends, like 
 physicians, 
 Thrive, give him over: must I take the cure upon me? 
 Has much disgraced me in't; I'm angry at him, 
 That might have known my place: I see no sense for't, 
 But his occasion might have woo'd me first; 
 For, in my conscience, I was the first man 
 That e'er received gift from him: 
 And does he think so backwardly of me now, 
 That I'll requite its last? No: 
 So it may prove an argument of laughter 
 To the rest, and 'mongst lords I be thought a fool. 
 I'ld rather than the worth of thrice the sum, 
 Had sent to me first, but for my mind's sake; 
 I'd such a courage to do him good. But now return, 
 And with their faint reply this answer join; 
 Who bates mine honour shall not know my coin. 

 Exit  Servant  Excellent! Your lordship's a goodly villain. The 
 devil knew not what he did when he made man 
 politic; he crossed himself by 't: and I cannot 
 think but, in the end, the villainies of man will 
 set him clear. How fairly this lord strives to 
 appear foul! takes virtuous copies to be wicked, 
 like those that under hot ardent zeal would set 
 whole realms on fire: Of such a nature is his 
 politic love. 
 This was my lord's best hope; now all are fled, 
 Save only the gods: now his friends are dead, 
 Doors, that were ne'er acquainted with their wards 
 Many a bounteous year must be employ'd 
 Now to guard sure their master. 
 And this is all a liberal course allows; 
 Who cannot keep his wealth must keep his house. 

 Exit  Shakespeare homepage  |  Timon of Athens  | Act 3, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 