SCENE III. A lonely part of the forest. Titus Andronicus  Shakespeare homepage  |  Titus Andronicus  | Act 2, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. A lonely part of the forest. 
 Enter AARON, with a bag of gold  AARON  He that had wit would think that I had none, 
 To bury so much gold under a tree, 
 And never after to inherit it. 
 Let him that thinks of me so abjectly 
 Know that this gold must coin a stratagem, 
 Which, cunningly effected, will beget 
 A very excellent piece of villany: 
 And so repose, sweet gold, for their unrest 

 Hides the gold  That have their alms out of the empress' chest. 

 Enter TAMORA  TAMORA  My lovely Aaron, wherefore look'st thou sad, 
 When every thing doth make a gleeful boast? 
 The birds chant melody on every bush, 
 The snake lies rolled in the cheerful sun, 
 The green leaves quiver with the cooling wind 
 And make a chequer'd shadow on the ground: 
 Under their sweet shade, Aaron, let us sit, 
 And, whilst the babbling echo mocks the hounds, 
 Replying shrilly to the well-tuned horns, 
 As if a double hunt were heard at once, 
 Let us sit down and mark their yelping noise; 
 And, after conflict such as was supposed 
 The wandering prince and Dido once enjoy'd, 
 When with a happy storm they were surprised 
 And curtain'd with a counsel-keeping cave, 
 We may, each wreathed in the other's arms, 
 Our pastimes done, possess a golden slumber; 
 Whiles hounds and horns and sweet melodious birds 
 Be unto us as is a nurse's song 
 Of lullaby to bring her babe asleep. 
 AARON  Madam, though Venus govern your desires, 
 Saturn is dominator over mine: 
 What signifies my deadly-standing eye, 
 My silence and my cloudy melancholy, 
 My fleece of woolly hair that now uncurls 
 Even as an adder when she doth unroll 
 To do some fatal execution? 
 No, madam, these are no venereal signs: 
 Vengeance is in my heart, death in my hand, 
 Blood and revenge are hammering in my head. 
 Hark Tamora, the empress of my soul, 
 Which never hopes more heaven than rests in thee, 
 This is the day of doom for Bassianus: 
 His Philomel must lose her tongue to-day, 
 Thy sons make pillage of her chastity 
 And wash their hands in Bassianus' blood. 
 Seest thou this letter? take it up, I pray thee, 
 And give the king this fatal plotted scroll. 
 Now question me no more; we are espied; 
 Here comes a parcel of our hopeful booty, 
 Which dreads not yet their lives' destruction. 
 TAMORA  Ah, my sweet Moor, sweeter to me than life! 
 AARON  No more, great empress; Bassianus comes: 
 Be cross with him; and I'll go fetch thy sons 
 To back thy quarrels, whatsoe'er they be. 

 Exit 
 Enter BASSIANUS and LAVINIA  BASSIANUS  Who have we here? Rome's royal empress, 
 Unfurnish'd of her well-beseeming troop? 
 Or is it Dian, habited like her, 
 Who hath abandoned her holy groves 
 To see the general hunting in this forest? 
 TAMORA  Saucy controller of our private steps! 
 Had I the power that some say Dian had, 
 Thy temples should be planted presently 
 With horns, as was Actaeon's; and the hounds 
 Should drive upon thy new-transformed limbs, 
 Unmannerly intruder as thou art! 
 LAVINIA  Under your patience, gentle empress, 
 'Tis thought you have a goodly gift in horning; 
 And to be doubted that your Moor and you 
 Are singled forth to try experiments: 
 Jove shield your husband from his hounds to-day! 
 'Tis pity they should take him for a stag. 
 BASSIANUS  Believe me, queen, your swarth Cimmerian 
 Doth make your honour of his body's hue, 
 Spotted, detested, and abominable. 
 Why are you sequester'd from all your train, 
 Dismounted from your snow-white goodly steed. 
 And wander'd hither to an obscure plot, 
 Accompanied but with a barbarous Moor, 
 If foul desire had not conducted you? 
 LAVINIA  And, being intercepted in your sport, 
 Great reason that my noble lord be rated 
 For sauciness. I pray you, let us hence, 
 And let her joy her raven-colour'd love; 
 This valley fits the purpose passing well. 
 BASSIANUS  The king my brother shall have note of this. 
 LAVINIA  Ay, for these slips have made him noted long: 
 Good king, to be so mightily abused! 
 TAMORA  Why have I patience to endure all this? 

 Enter DEMETRIUS and CHIRON  DEMETRIUS  How now, dear sovereign, and our gracious mother! 
 Why doth your highness look so pale and wan? 
 TAMORA  Have I not reason, think you, to look pale? 
 These two have 'ticed me hither to this place: 
 A barren detested vale, you see it is; 
 The trees, though summer, yet forlorn and lean, 
 O'ercome with moss and baleful mistletoe: 
 Here never shines the sun; here nothing breeds, 
 Unless the nightly owl or fatal raven: 
 And when they show'd me this abhorred pit, 
 They told me, here, at dead time of the night, 
 A thousand fiends, a thousand hissing snakes, 
 Ten thousand swelling toads, as many urchins, 
 Would make such fearful and confused cries 
 As any mortal body hearing it 
 Should straight fall mad, or else die suddenly. 
 No sooner had they told this hellish tale, 
 But straight they told me they would bind me here 
 Unto the body of a dismal yew, 
 And leave me to this miserable death: 
 And then they call'd me foul adulteress, 
 Lascivious Goth, and all the bitterest terms 
 That ever ear did hear to such effect: 
 And, had you not by wondrous fortune come, 
 This vengeance on me had they executed. 
 Revenge it, as you love your mother's life, 
 Or be ye not henceforth call'd my children. 
 DEMETRIUS  This is a witness that I am thy son. 

 Stabs BASSIANUS  CHIRON  And this for me, struck home to show my strength. 

 Also stabs BASSIANUS, who dies  LAVINIA  Ay, come, Semiramis, nay, barbarous Tamora, 
 For no name fits thy nature but thy own! 
 TAMORA  Give me thy poniard; you shall know, my boys 
 Your mother's hand shall right your mother's wrong. 
 DEMETRIUS  Stay, madam; here is more belongs to her; 
 First thrash the corn, then after burn the straw: 
 This minion stood upon her chastity, 
 Upon her nuptial vow, her loyalty, 
 And with that painted hope braves your mightiness: 
 And shall she carry this unto her grave? 
 CHIRON  An if she do, I would I were an eunuch. 
 Drag hence her husband to some secret hole, 
 And make his dead trunk pillow to our lust. 
 TAMORA  But when ye have the honey ye desire, 
 Let not this wasp outlive, us both to sting. 
 CHIRON  I warrant you, madam, we wil l make that sure. 
 Come, mistress, now perforce we will enjoy 
 That nice-preserved honesty of yours. 
 LAVINIA  O Tamora! thou bear'st a woman's face,-- 
 TAMORA  I will not hear her speak; away with her! 
 LAVINIA  Sweet lords, entreat her hear me but a word. 
 DEMETRIUS  Listen, fair madam: let it be your glory 
 To see her tears; but be your heart to them 
 As unrelenting flint to drops of rain. 
 LAVINIA  When did the tiger's young ones teach the dam? 
 O, do not learn her wrath; she taught it thee; 
 The milk thou suck'dst from her did turn to marble; 
 Even at thy teat thou hadst thy tyranny. 
 Yet every mother breeds not sons alike: 

 To CHIRON  Do thou entreat her show a woman pity. 
 CHIRON  What, wouldst thou have me prove myself a bastard? 
 LAVINIA  'Tis true; the raven doth not hatch a lark: 
 Yet have I heard,--O, could I find it now!-- 
 The lion moved with pity did endure 
 To have his princely paws pared all away: 
 Some say that ravens foster forlorn children, 
 The whilst their own birds famish in their nests: 
 O, be to me, though thy hard heart say no, 
 Nothing so kind, but something pitiful! 
 TAMORA  I know not what it means; away with her! 
 LAVINIA  O, let me teach thee! for my father's sake, 
 That gave thee life, when well he might have 
 slain thee, 
 Be not obdurate, open thy deaf ears. 
 TAMORA  Hadst thou in person ne'er offended me, 
 Even for his sake am I pitiless. 
 Remember, boys, I pour'd forth tears in vain, 
 To save your brother from the sacrifice; 
 But fierce Andronicus would not relent; 
 Therefore, away with her, and use her as you will, 
 The worse to her, the better loved of me. 
 LAVINIA  O Tamora, be call'd a gentle queen, 
 And with thine own hands kill me in this place! 
 For 'tis not life that I have begg'd so long; 
 Poor I was slain when Bassianus died. 
 TAMORA  What begg'st thou, then? fond woman, let me go. 
 LAVINIA  'Tis present death I beg; and one thing more 
 That womanhood denies my tongue to tell: 
 O, keep me from their worse than killing lust, 
 And tumble me into some loathsome pit, 
 Where never man's eye may behold my body: 
 Do this, and be a charitable murderer. 
 TAMORA  So should I rob my sweet sons of their fee: 
 No, let them satisfy their lust on thee. 
 DEMETRIUS  Away! for thou hast stay'd us here too long. 
 LAVINIA  No grace? no womanhood? Ah, beastly creature! 
 The blot and enemy to our general name! 
 Confusion fall-- 
 CHIRON  Nay, then I'll stop your mouth. Bring thou her husband: 
 This is the hole where Aaron bid us hide him. 

 DEMETRIUS throws the body of BASSIANUS into the  pit; then exeunt DEMETRIUS and CHIRON, dragging off LAVINIA  TAMORA  Farewell, my sons: see that you make her sure. 
 Ne'er let my heart know merry cheer indeed, 
 Till all the Andronici be made away. 
 Now will I hence to seek my lovely Moor, 
 And let my spleenful sons this trull deflow'r. 

 Exit 
 Re-enter AARON, with QUINTUS and MARTIUS  AARON  Come on, my lords, the better foot before: 
 Straight will I bring you to the loathsome pit 
 Where I espied the panther fast asleep. 
 QUINTUS  My sight is very dull, whate'er it bodes. 
 MARTIUS  And mine, I promise you; were't not for shame, 
 Well could I leave our sport to sleep awhile. 

 Falls into the pit  QUINTUS  What art thou fall'n? What subtle hole is this, 
 Whose mouth is cover'd with rude-growing briers, 
 Upon whose leaves are drops of new-shed blood 
 As fresh as morning dew distill'd on flowers? 
 A very fatal place it seems to me. 
 Speak, brother, hast thou hurt thee with the fall? 
 MARTIUS  O brother, with the dismall'st object hurt 
 That ever eye with sight made heart lament! 
 AARON  [Aside]  Now will I fetch the king to find them here, 
 That he thereby may give a likely guess 
 How these were they that made away his brother. 

 Exit  MARTIUS  Why dost not comfort me, and help me out 
 From this unhallowed and blood-stained hole? 
 QUINTUS  I am surprised with an uncouth fear; 
 A chilling sweat o'er-runs my trembling joints: 
 My heart suspects more than mine eye can see. 
 MARTIUS  To prove thou hast a true-divining heart, 
 Aaron and thou look down into this den, 
 And see a fearful sight of blood and death. 
 QUINTUS  Aaron is gone; and my compassionate heart 
 Will not permit mine eyes once to behold 
 The thing whereat it trembles by surmise; 
 O, tell me how it is; for ne'er till now 
 Was I a child to fear I know not what. 
 MARTIUS  Lord Bassianus lies embrewed here, 
 All on a heap, like to a slaughter'd lamb, 
 In this detested, dark, blood-drinking pit. 
 QUINTUS  If it be dark, how dost thou know 'tis he? 
 MARTIUS  Upon his bloody finger he doth wear 
 A precious ring, that lightens all the hole, 
 Which, like a taper in some monument, 
 Doth shine upon the dead man's earthy cheeks, 
 And shows the ragged entrails of the pit: 
 So pale did shine the moon on Pyramus 
 When he by night lay bathed in maiden blood. 
 O brother, help me with thy fainting hand-- 
 If fear hath made thee faint, as me it hath-- 
 Out of this fell devouring receptacle, 
 As hateful as Cocytus' misty mouth. 
 QUINTUS  Reach me thy hand, that I may help thee out; 
 Or, wanting strength to do thee so much good, 
 I may be pluck'd into the swallowing womb 
 Of this deep pit, poor Bassianus' grave. 
 I have no strength to pluck thee to the brink. 
 MARTIUS  Nor I no strength to climb without thy help. 
 QUINTUS  Thy hand once more; I will not loose again, 
 Till thou art here aloft, or I below: 
 Thou canst not come to me: I come to thee. 

 Falls in 
 Enter SATURNINUS with AARON  SATURNINUS  Along with me: I'll see what hole is here, 
 And what he is that now is leap'd into it. 
 Say who art thou that lately didst descend 
 Into this gaping hollow of the earth? 
 MARTIUS  The unhappy son of old Andronicus: 
 Brought hither in a most unlucky hour, 
 To find thy brother Bassianus dead. 
 SATURNINUS  My brother dead! I know thou dost but jest: 
 He and his lady both are at the lodge 
 Upon the north side of this pleasant chase; 
 'Tis not an hour since I left him there. 
 MARTIUS  We know not where you left him all alive; 
 But, out, alas! here have we found him dead. 

 Re-enter TAMORA, with Attendants; TITUS ANDRONICUS, and Lucius  TAMORA  Where is my lord the king? 
 SATURNINUS  Here, Tamora, though grieved with killing grief. 
 TAMORA  Where is thy brother Bassianus? 
 SATURNINUS  Now to the bottom dost thou search my wound: 
 Poor Bassianus here lies murdered. 
 TAMORA  Then all too late I bring this fatal writ, 
 The complot of this timeless tragedy; 
 And wonder greatly that man's face can fold 
 In pleasing smiles such murderous tyranny. 

 She giveth SATURNINUS a letter  SATURNINUS  [Reads]  'An if we miss to meet him handsomely-- 
 Sweet huntsman, Bassianus 'tis we mean-- 
 Do thou so much as dig the grave for him: 
 Thou know'st our meaning. Look for thy reward 
 Among the nettles at the elder-tree 
 Which overshades the mouth of that same pit 
 Where we decreed to bury Bassianus. 
 Do this, and purchase us thy lasting friends.' 
 O Tamora! was ever heard the like? 
 This is the pit, and this the elder-tree. 
 Look, sirs, if you can find the huntsman out 
 That should have murdered Bassianus here. 
 AARON  My gracious lord, here is the bag of gold. 
 SATURNINUS  [To TITUS]  Two of thy whelps, fell curs of 
 bloody kind, 
 Have here bereft my brother of his life. 
 Sirs, drag them from the pit unto the prison: 
 There let them bide until we have devised 
 Some never-heard-of torturing pain for them. 
 TAMORA  What, are they in this pit? O wondrous thing! 
 How easily murder is discovered! 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  High emperor, upon my feeble knee 
 I beg this boon, with tears not lightly shed, 
 That this fell fault of my accursed sons, 
 Accursed if the fault be proved in them,-- 
 SATURNINUS  If it be proved! you see it is apparent. 
 Who found this letter? Tamora, was it you? 
 TAMORA  Andronicus himself did take it up. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  I did, my lord: yet let me be their bail; 
 For, by my father's reverend tomb, I vow 
 They shall be ready at your highness' will 
 To answer their suspicion with their lives. 
 SATURNINUS  Thou shalt not bail them: see thou follow me. 
 Some bring the murder'd body, some the murderers: 
 Let them not speak a word; the guilt is plain; 
 For, by my soul, were there worse end than death, 
 That end upon them should be executed. 
 TAMORA  Andronicus, I will entreat the king; 
 Fear not thy sons; they shall do well enough. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  Come, Lucius, come; stay not to talk with them. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Titus Andronicus  | Act 2, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 