SCENE III. The same. A public place. Titus Andronicus  Shakespeare homepage  |  Titus Andronicus  | Act 4, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. The same. A public place. 
 Enter TITUS, bearing arrows with letters at the  ends of them; with him, MARCUS, Young LUCIUS,  PUBLIUS, SEMPRONIUS, CAIUS, and other Gentlemen, with bows  TITUS ANDRONICUS  Come, Marcus; come, kinsmen; this is the way. 
 Sir boy, now let me see your archery; 
 Look ye draw home enough, and 'tis there straight. 
 Terras Astraea reliquit: 
 Be you remember'd, Marcus, she's gone, she's fled. 
 Sirs, take you to your tools. You, cousins, shall 
 Go sound the ocean, and cast your nets; 
 Happily you may catch her in the sea; 
 Yet there's as little justice as at land: 
 No; Publius and Sempronius, you must do it; 
 'Tis you must dig with mattock and with spade, 
 And pierce the inmost centre of the earth: 
 Then, when you come to Pluto's region, 
 I pray you, deliver him this petition; 
 Tell him, it is for justice and for aid, 
 And that it comes from old Andronicus, 
 Shaken with sorrows in ungrateful Rome. 
 Ah, Rome! Well, well; I made thee miserable 
 What time I threw the people's suffrages 
 On him that thus doth tyrannize o'er me. 
 Go, get you gone; and pray be careful all, 
 And leave you not a man-of-war unsearch'd: 
 This wicked emperor may have shipp'd her hence; 
 And, kinsmen, then we may go pipe for justice. 
 MARCUS ANDRONICUS  O Publius, is not this a heavy case, 
 To see thy noble uncle thus distract? 
 PUBLIUS  Therefore, my lord, it highly us concerns 
 By day and night to attend him carefully, 
 And feed his humour kindly as we may, 
 Till time beget some careful remedy. 
 MARCUS ANDRONICUS  Kinsmen, his sorrows are past remedy. 
 Join with the Goths; and with revengeful war 
 Take wreak on Rome for this ingratitude, 
 And vengeance on the traitor Saturnine. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  Publius, how now! how now, my masters! 
 What, have you met with her? 
 PUBLIUS  No, my good lord; but Pluto sends you word, 
 If you will have Revenge from hell, you shall: 
 Marry, for Justice, she is so employ'd, 
 He thinks, with Jove in heaven, or somewhere else, 
 So that perforce you must needs stay a time. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  He doth me wrong to feed me with delays. 
 I'll dive into the burning lake below, 
 And pull her out of Acheron by the heels. 
 Marcus, we are but shrubs, no cedars we 
 No big-boned men framed of the Cyclops' size; 
 But metal, Marcus, steel to the very back, 
 Yet wrung with wrongs more than our backs can bear: 
 And, sith there's no justice in earth nor hell, 
 We will solicit heaven and move the gods 
 To send down Justice for to wreak our wrongs. 
 Come, to this gear. You are a good archer, Marcus; 

 He gives them the arrows  'Ad Jovem,' that's for you: here, 'Ad Apollinem:' 
 'Ad Martem,' that's for myself: 
 Here, boy, to Pallas: here, to Mercury: 
 To Saturn, Caius, not to Saturnine; 
 You were as good to shoot against the wind. 
 To it, boy! Marcus, loose when I bid. 
 Of my word, I have written to effect; 
 There's not a god left unsolicited. 
 MARCUS ANDRONICUS  Kinsmen, shoot all your shafts into the court: 
 We will afflict the emperor in his pride. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  Now, masters, draw. 

 They shoot  O, well said, Lucius! 
 Good boy, in Virgo's lap; give it Pallas. 
 MARCUS ANDRONICUS  My lord, I aim a mile beyond the moon; 
 Your letter is with Jupiter by this. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  Ha, ha! 
 Publius, Publius, what hast thou done? 
 See, see, thou hast shot off one of Taurus' horns. 
 MARCUS ANDRONICUS  This was the sport, my lord: when Publius shot, 
 The Bull, being gall'd, gave Aries such a knock 
 That down fell both the Ram's horns in the court; 
 And who should find them but the empress' villain? 
 She laugh'd, and told the Moor he should not choose 
 But give them to his master for a present. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  Why, there it goes: God give his lordship joy! 

 Enter a Clown, with a basket, and two pigeons in it  News, news from heaven! Marcus, the post is come. 
 Sirrah, what tidings? have you any letters? 
 Shall I have justice? what says Jupiter? 
 Clown  O, the gibbet-maker! he says that he hath taken 
 them down again, for the man must not be hanged till 
 the next week. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  But what says Jupiter, I ask thee? 
 Clown  Alas, sir, I know not Jupiter; I never drank with him 
 in all my life. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  Why, villain, art not thou the carrier? 
 Clown  Ay, of my pigeons, sir; nothing else. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  Why, didst thou not come from heaven? 
 Clown  From heaven! alas, sir, I never came there     God 
 forbid I should be so bold to press to heaven in my 
 young days. Why, I am going with my pigeons to the 
 tribunal plebs, to take up a matter of brawl 
 betwixt my uncle and one of the emperial's men. 
 MARCUS ANDRONICUS  Why, sir, that is as fit as can be to serve for 
 your oration; and let him deliver the pigeons to 
 the emperor from you. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  Tell me, can you deliver an oration to the emperor 
 with a grace? 
 Clown  Nay, truly, sir, I could never say grace in all my life. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  Sirrah, come hither: make no more ado, 
 But give your pigeons to the emperor: 
 By me thou shalt have justice at his hands. 
 Hold, hold; meanwhile here's money for thy charges. 
 Give me pen and ink. Sirrah, can you with a grace 
 deliver a supplication? 
 Clown  Ay, sir. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  Then here is a supplication for you. And when you 
 come to him, at the first approach you must kneel, 
 then kiss his foot, then deliver up your pigeons, and 
 then look for your reward. I'll be at hand, sir; see 
 you do it bravely. 
 Clown  I warrant you, sir, let me alone. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  Sirrah, hast thou a knife? come, let me see it. 
 Here, Marcus, fold it in the oration; 
 For thou hast made it like an humble suppliant. 
 And when thou hast given it the emperor, 
 Knock at my door, and tell me what he says. 
 Clown  God be with you, sir; I will. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  Come, Marcus, let us go. Publius, follow me. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Titus Andronicus  | Act 4, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 