SCENE IV. The same. Before the palace. Titus Andronicus  Shakespeare homepage  |  Titus Andronicus  | Act 4, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE IV. The same. Before the palace. 
 Enter SATURNINUS, TAMORA, DEMETRIUS, CHIRON,  Lords, and others; SATURNINUS with the arrows in his hand that TITUS shot  SATURNINUS  Why, lords, what wrongs are these! was ever seen 
 An emperor in Rome thus overborne, 
 Troubled, confronted thus; and, for the extent 
 Of egal justice, used in such contempt? 
 My lords, you know, as know the mightful gods, 
 However these disturbers of our peace 
 Buz in the people's ears, there nought hath pass'd, 
 But even with law, against the willful sons 
 Of old Andronicus. And what an if 
 His sorrows have so overwhelm'd his wits, 
 Shall we be thus afflicted in his wreaks, 
 His fits, his frenzy, and his bitterness? 
 And now he writes to heaven for his redress: 
 See, here's to Jove, and this to Mercury; 
 This to Apollo; this to the god of war; 
 Sweet scrolls to fly about the streets of Rome! 
 What's this but libelling against the senate, 
 And blazoning our injustice every where? 
 A goodly humour, is it not, my lords? 
 As who would say, in Rome no justice were. 
 But if I live, his feigned ecstasies 
 Shall be no shelter to these outrages: 
 But he and his shall know that justice lives 
 In Saturninus' health, whom, if she sleep, 
 He'll so awake as she in fury shall 
 Cut off the proud'st conspirator that lives. 
 TAMORA  My gracious lord, my lovely Saturnine, 
 Lord of my life, commander of my thoughts, 
 Calm thee, and bear the faults of Titus' age, 
 The effects of sorrow for his valiant sons, 
 Whose loss hath pierced him deep and scarr'd his heart; 
 And rather comfort his distressed plight 
 Than prosecute the meanest or the best 
 For these contempts. 

 Aside  Why, thus it shall become 
 High-witted Tamora to gloze with all: 
 But, Titus, I have touched thee to the quick, 
 Thy life-blood out: if Aaron now be wise, 
 Then is all safe, the anchor's in the port. 

 Enter Clown  How now, good fellow! wouldst thou speak with us? 
 Clown  Yea, forsooth, an your mistership be emperial. 
 TAMORA  Empress I am, but yonder sits the emperor. 
 Clown  'Tis he. God and Saint Stephen give you good den: 
 I have brought you a letter and a couple of pigeons here. 

 SATURNINUS reads the letter  SATURNINUS  Go, take him away, and hang him presently. 
 Clown  How much money must I have? 
 TAMORA  Come, sirrah, you must be hanged. 
 Clown  Hanged! by'r lady, then I have brought up a neck to 
 a fair end. 

 Exit, guarded  SATURNINUS  Despiteful and intolerable wrongs! 
 Shall I endure this monstrous villany? 
 I know from whence this same device proceeds: 
 May this be borne?--as if his traitorous sons, 
 That died by law for murder of our brother, 
 Have by my means been butcher'd wrongfully! 
 Go, drag the villain hither by the hair; 
 Nor age nor honour shall shape privilege: 
 For this proud mock I'll be thy slaughterman; 
 Sly frantic wretch, that holp'st to make me great, 
 In hope thyself should govern Rome and me. 

 Enter AEMILIUS  What news with thee, AEmilius? 
 AEMILIUS  Arm, arm, my lord;--Rome never had more cause. 
 The Goths have gather'd head; and with a power 
 high-resolved men, bent to the spoil, 
 They hither march amain, under conduct 
 Of Lucius, son to old Andronicus; 
 Who threats, in course of this revenge, to do 
 As much as ever Coriolanus did. 
 SATURNINUS  Is warlike Lucius general of the Goths? 
 These tidings nip me, and I hang the head 
 As flowers with frost or grass beat down with storms: 
 Ay, now begin our sorrows to approach: 
 'Tis he the common people love so much; 
 Myself hath often over-heard them say, 
 When I have walked like a private man, 
 That Lucius' banishment was wrongfully, 
 And they have wish'd that Lucius were their emperor. 
 TAMORA  Why should you fear? is not your city strong? 
 SATURNINUS  Ay, but the citizens favor Lucius, 
 And will revolt from me to succor him. 
 TAMORA  King, be thy thoughts imperious, like thy name. 
 Is the sun dimm'd, that gnats do fly in it? 
 The eagle suffers little birds to sing, 
 And is not careful what they mean thereby, 
 Knowing that with the shadow of his wings 
 He can at pleasure stint their melody: 
 Even so mayst thou the giddy men of Rome. 
 Then cheer thy spirit : for know, thou emperor, 
 I will enchant the old Andronicus 
 With words more sweet, and yet more dangerous, 
 Than baits to fish, or honey-stalks to sheep, 
 When as the one is wounded with the bait, 
 The other rotted with delicious feed. 
 SATURNINUS  But he will not entreat his son for us. 
 TAMORA  If Tamora entreat him, then he will: 
 For I can smooth and fill his aged ear 
 With golden promises; that, were his heart 
 Almost impregnable, his old ears deaf, 
 Yet should both ear and heart obey my tongue. 

 To AEmilius  Go thou before, be our ambassador: 
 Say that the emperor requests a parley 
 Of warlike Lucius, and appoint the meeting 
 Even at his father's house, the old Andronicus. 
 SATURNINUS  AEmilius, do this message honourably: 
 And if he stand on hostage for his safety, 
 Bid him demand what pledge will please him best. 
 AEMILIUS  Your bidding shall I do effectually. 

 Exit  TAMORA  Now will I to that old Andronicus; 
 And temper him with all the art I have, 
 To pluck proud Lucius from the warlike Goths. 
 And now, sweet emperor, be blithe again, 
 And bury all thy fear in my devices. 
 SATURNINUS  Then go successantly, and plead to him. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Titus Andronicus  | Act 4, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 