SCENE III. Court of TITUS's house. A banquet set out. Titus Andronicus  Shakespeare homepage  |  Titus Andronicus  | Act 5, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  SCENE III. Court of TITUS's house. A banquet set out. 
 Enter LUCIUS, MARCUS, and Goths, with AARON prisoner  LUCIUS  Uncle Marcus, since it is my father's mind 
 That I repair to Rome, I am content. 
 First Goth  And ours with thine, befall what fortune will. 
 LUCIUS  Good uncle, take you in this barbarous Moor, 
 This ravenous tiger, this accursed devil; 
 Let him receive no sustenance, fetter him 
 Till he be brought unto the empress' face, 
 For testimony of her foul proceedings: 
 And see the ambush of our friends be strong; 
 I fear the emperor means no good to us. 
 AARON  Some devil whisper curses in mine ear, 
 And prompt me, that my tongue may utter forth 
 The venomous malice of my swelling heart! 
 LUCIUS  Away, inhuman dog! unhallow'd slave! 
 Sirs, help our uncle to convey him in. 

 Exeunt Goths, with AARON. Flourish within  The trumpets show the emperor is at hand. 

 Enter SATURNINUS and TAMORA, with AEMILIUS, Tribunes, Senators, and others  SATURNINUS  What, hath the firmament more suns than one? 
 LUCIUS  What boots it thee to call thyself a sun? 
 MARCUS ANDRONICUS  Rome's emperor, and nephew, break the parle; 
 These quarrels must be quietly debated. 
 The feast is ready, which the careful Titus 
 Hath ordain'd to an honourable end, 
 For peace, for love, for league, and good to Rome: 
 Please you, therefore, draw nigh, and take your places. 
 SATURNINUS  Marcus, we will. 

 Hautboys sound. The Company sit down at table 
 Enter TITUS dressed like a Cook, LAVINIA veiled,  Young LUCIUS, and others. TITUS places the dishes on the table  TITUS ANDRONICUS  Welcome, my gracious lord; welcome, dread queen; 
 Welcome, ye warlike Goths; welcome, Lucius; 
 And welcome, all: although the cheer be poor, 
 'Twill fill your stomachs; please you eat of it. 
 SATURNINUS  Why art thou thus attired, Andronicus? 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  Because I would be sure to have all well, 
 To entertain your highness and your empress. 
 TAMORA  We are beholding to you, good Andronicus. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  An if your highness knew my heart, you were. 
 My lord the emperor, resolve me this: 
 Was it well done of rash Virginius 
 To slay his daughter with his own right hand, 
 Because she was enforced, stain'd, and deflower'd? 
 SATURNINUS  It was, Andronicus. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  Your reason, mighty lord? 
 SATURNINUS  Because the girl should not survive her shame, 
 And by her presence still renew his sorrows. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  A reason mighty, strong, and effectual; 
 A pattern, precedent, and lively warrant, 
 For me, most wretched, to perform the like. 
 Die, die, Lavinia, and thy shame with thee; 

 Kills LAVINIA  And, with thy shame, thy father's sorrow die! 
 SATURNINUS  What hast thou done, unnatural and unkind? 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  Kill'd her, for whom my tears have made me blind. 
 I am as woful as Virginius was, 
 And have a thousand times more cause than he 
 To do this outrage: and it now is done. 
 SATURNINUS  What, was she ravish'd? tell who did the deed. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  Will't please you eat? will't please your 
 highness feed? 
 TAMORA  Why hast thou slain thine only daughter thus? 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  Not I; 'twas Chiron and Demetrius: 
 They ravish'd her, and cut away her tongue; 
 And they, 'twas they, that did her all this wrong. 
 SATURNINUS  Go fetch them hither to us presently. 
 TITUS ANDRONICUS  Why, there they are both, baked in that pie; 
 Whereof their mother daintily hath fed, 
 Eating the flesh that she herself hath bred. 
 'Tis true, 'tis true; witness my knife's sharp point. 

 Kills TAMORA  SATURNINUS  Die, frantic wretch, for this accursed deed! 

 Kills TITUS  LUCIUS  Can the son's eye behold his father bleed? 
 There's meed for meed, death for a deadly deed! 

 Kills SATURNINUS. A great tumult. LUCIUS, MARCUS, and others go up into the balcony  MARCUS ANDRONICUS  You sad-faced men, people and sons of Rome, 
 By uproar sever'd, like a flight of fowl 
 Scatter'd by winds and high tempestuous gusts, 
 O, let me teach you how to knit again 
 This scatter'd corn  into one mutual sheaf, 
 These broken limbs again into one body; 
 Lest Rome herself be bane unto herself, 
 And she whom mighty kingdoms court'sy to, 
 Like a forlorn and desperate castaway, 
 Do shameful execution on herself. 
 But if my frosty signs and chaps of age, 
 Grave witnesses of true experience, 
 Cannot induce you to attend my words, 

 To LUCIUS  Speak, Rome's dear friend, as erst our ancestor, 
 When with his solemn tongue he did discourse 
 To love-sick Dido's sad attending ear 
 The story of that baleful burning night 
 When subtle Greeks surprised King Priam's Troy, 
 Tell us what Sinon hath bewitch'd our ears, 
 Or who hath brought the fatal engine in 
 That gives our Troy, our Rome, the civil wound. 
 My heart is not compact of flint nor steel; 
 Nor can I utter all our bitter grief, 
 But floods of tears will drown my oratory, 
 And break my utterance, even in the time 
 When it should move you to attend me most, 
 Lending your kind commiseration. 
 Here is a captain, let him tell the tale; 
 Your hearts will throb and weep to hear him speak. 
 LUCIUS  Then, noble auditory, be it known to you, 
 That cursed Chiron and Demetrius 
 Were they that murdered our emperor's brother; 
 And they it were that ravished our sister: 
 For their fell faults our brothers were beheaded; 
 Our father's tears despised, and basely cozen'd 
 Of that true hand that fought Rome's quarrel out, 
 And sent her enemies unto the grave. 
 Lastly, myself unkindly banished, 
 The gates shut on me, and turn'd weeping out, 
 To beg relief among Rome's enemies: 
 Who drown'd their enmity in my true tears. 
 And oped their arms to embrace me as a friend. 
 I am the turned forth, be it known to you, 
 That have preserved her welfare in my blood; 
 And from her bosom took the enemy's point, 
 Sheathing the steel in my adventurous body. 
 Alas, you know I am no vaunter, I; 
 My scars can witness, dumb although they are, 
 That my report is just and full of truth. 
 But, soft! methinks I do digress too much, 
 Citing my worthless praise: O, pardon me; 
 For when no friends are by, men praise themselves. 
 MARCUS ANDRONICUS  Now is my turn to speak. Behold this child: 

 Pointing to the Child in the arms of an Attendant  Of this was Tamora delivered; 
 The issue of an irreligious Moor, 
 Chief architect and plotter of these woes: 
 The villain is alive in Titus' house, 
 And as he is, to witness this is true. 
 Now judge what cause had Titus to revenge 
 These wrongs, unspeakable, past patience, 
 Or more than any living man could bear. 
 Now you have heard the truth, what say you, Romans? 
 Have we done aught amiss,--show us wherein, 
 And, from the place where you behold us now, 
 The poor remainder of Andronici 
 Will, hand in hand, all headlong cast us down. 
 And on the ragged stones beat forth our brains, 
 And make a mutual closure of our house. 
 Speak, Romans, speak; and if you say we shall, 
 Lo, hand in hand, Lucius and I will fall. 
 AEMILIUS  Come, come, thou reverend man of Rome, 
 And bring our emperor gently in thy hand, 
 Lucius our emperor; for well I know 
 The common voice do cry it shall be so. 
 All  Lucius, all hail, Rome's royal emperor! 
 MARCUS ANDRONICUS  Go, go into old Titus' sorrowful house, 

 To Attendants  And hither hale that misbelieving Moor, 
 To be adjudged some direful slaughtering death, 
 As punishment for his most wicked life. 

 Exeunt Attendants 
 LUCIUS, MARCUS, and the others descend  All  Lucius, all hail, Rome's gracious governor! 
 LUCIUS  Thanks, gentle Romans: may I govern so, 
 To heal Rome's harms, and wipe away her woe! 
 But, gentle people, give me aim awhile, 
 For nature puts me to a heavy task: 
 Stand all aloof: but, uncle, draw you near, 
 To shed obsequious tears upon this trunk. 
 O, take this warm kiss on thy pale cold lips, 

 Kissing TITUS  These sorrowful drops upon thy blood-stain'd face, 
 The last true duties of thy noble son! 
 MARCUS ANDRONICUS  Tear for tear, and loving kiss for kiss, 
 Thy brother Marcus tenders on thy lips: 
 O were the sum of these that I should pay 
 Countless and infinite, yet would I pay them! 
 LUCIUS  Come hither, boy; come, come, and learn of us 
 To melt in showers: thy grandsire loved thee well: 
 Many a time he danced thee on his knee, 
 Sung thee asleep, his loving breast thy pillow: 
 Many a matter hath he told to thee, 
 Meet and agreeing with thine infancy; 
 In that respect, then, like a loving child, 
 Shed yet some small drops from thy tender spring, 
 Because kind nature doth require it so: 
 Friends should associate friends in grief and woe: 
 Bid him farewell; commit him to the grave; 
 Do him that kindness, and take leave of him. 
 Young LUCIUS  O grandsire, grandsire! even with all my heart 
 Would I were dead, so you did live again! 
 O Lord, I cannot speak to him for weeping; 
 My tears will choke me, if I ope my mouth. 

 Re-enter Attendants with AARON  AEMILIUS  You sad Andronici, have done with woes: 
 Give sentence on this execrable wretch, 
 That hath been breeder of these dire events. 
 LUCIUS  Set him breast-deep in earth, and famish him; 
 There let him stand, and rave, and cry for food; 
 If any one relieves or pities him, 
 For the offence he dies. This is our doom: 
 Some stay to see him fasten'd in the earth. 
 AARON  O, why should wrath be mute, and fury dumb? 
 I am no baby, I, that with base prayers 
 I should repent the evils I have done: 
 Ten thousand worse than ever yet I did 
 Would I perform, if I might have my will; 
 If one good deed in all my life I did, 
 I do repent it from my very soul. 
 LUCIUS  Some loving friends convey the emperor hence, 
 And give him burial in his father's grave: 
 My father and Lavinia shall forthwith 
 Be closed in our household's monument. 
 As for that heinous tiger, Tamora, 
 No funeral rite, nor man in mourning weeds, 
 No mournful bell shall ring her burial; 
 But throw her forth to beasts and birds of prey: 
 Her life was beast-like, and devoid of pity; 
 And, being so, shall have like want of pity. 
 See justice done on Aaron, that damn'd Moor, 
 By whom our heavy haps had their beginning: 
 Then, afterwards, to order well the state, 
 That like events may ne'er it ruinate. 

 Exeunt 