SCENE V. Another part of the plains. Troilus and Cressida  Shakespeare homepage  |  Troiles and Cressida  | Act 5, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE V. Another part of the plains. 
 Enter DIOMEDES and a Servant  DIOMEDES  Go, go, my servant, take thou Troilus' horse; 
 Present the fair steed to my lady Cressid: 
 Fellow, commend my service to her beauty; 
 Tell her I have chastised the amorous Trojan, 
 And am her knight by proof. 
 Servant  I go, my lord. 

 Exit 
 Enter AGAMEMNON  AGAMEMNON  Renew, renew! The fierce Polydamas 
 Hath beat down Menon: bastard Margarelon 
 Hath Doreus prisoner, 
 And stands colossus-wise, waving his beam, 
 Upon the pashed corses of the kings 
 Epistrophus and Cedius: Polyxenes is slain, 
 Amphimachus and Thoas deadly hurt, 
 Patroclus ta'en or slain, and Palamedes 
 Sore hurt and bruised: the dreadful Sagittary 
 Appals our numbers: haste we, Diomed, 
 To reinforcement, or we perish all. 

 Enter NESTOR  NESTOR  Go, bear Patroclus' body to Achilles; 
 And bid the snail-paced Ajax arm for shame. 
 There is a thousand Hectors in the field: 
 Now here he fights on Galathe his horse, 
 And there lacks work; anon he's there afoot, 
 And there they fly or die, like scaled sculls 
 Before the belching whale; then is he yonder, 
 And there the strawy Greeks, ripe for his edge, 
 Fall down before him, like the mower's swath: 
 Here, there, and every where, he leaves and takes, 
 Dexterity so obeying appetite 
 That what he will he does, and does so much 
 That proof is call'd impossibility. 

 Enter ULYSSES  ULYSSES  O, courage, courage, princes! great Achilles 
 Is arming, weeping, cursing, vowing vengeance: 
 Patroclus' wounds have roused his drowsy blood, 
 Together with his mangled Myrmidons, 
 That noseless, handless, hack'd and chipp'd, come to him, 
 Crying on Hector. Ajax hath lost a friend 
 And foams at mouth, and he is arm'd and at it, 
 Roaring for Troilus, who hath done to-day 
 Mad and fantastic execution, 
 Engaging and redeeming of himself 
 With such a careless force and forceless care 
 As if that luck, in very spite of cunning, 
 Bade him win all. 

 Enter AJAX  AJAX  Troilus! thou coward Troilus! 

 Exit  DIOMEDES  Ay, there, there. 
 NESTOR  So, so, we draw together. 

 Enter ACHILLES  ACHILLES  Where is this Hector? 
 Come, come, thou boy-queller, show thy face; 
 Know what it is to meet Achilles angry: 
 Hector? where's Hector? I will none but Hector. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Troiles and Cressida  | Act 5, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 