SCENE III. The Grecian camp. Before Achilles' tent. Troilus and Cressida  Shakespeare homepage  |  Troiles and Cressida  | Act 3, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. The Grecian camp. Before Achilles' tent. 
 Enter AGAMEMNON, ULYSSES, DIOMEDES, NESTOR, AJAX, MENELAUS, and CALCHAS  CALCHAS  Now, princes, for the service I have done you, 
 The advantage of the time prompts me aloud 
 To call for recompense. Appear it to your mind 
 That, through the sight I bear in things to love, 
 I have abandon'd Troy, left my possession, 
 Incurr'd a traitor's name; exposed myself, 
 From certain and possess'd conveniences, 
 To doubtful fortunes; sequestering from me all 
 That time, acquaintance, custom and condition 
 Made tame and most familiar to my nature, 
 And here, to do you service, am become 
 As new into the world, strange, unacquainted: 
 I do beseech you, as in way of taste, 
 To give me now a little benefit, 
 Out of those many register'd in promise, 
 Which, you say, live to come in my behalf. 
 AGAMEMNON  What wouldst thou of us, Trojan? make demand. 
 CALCHAS  You have a Trojan prisoner, call'd Antenor, 
 Yesterday took: Troy holds him very dear. 
 Oft have you--often have you thanks therefore-- 
 Desired my Cressid in right great exchange, 
 Whom Troy hath still denied: but this Antenor, 
 I know, is such a wrest in their affairs 
 That their negotiations all must slack, 
 Wanting his manage; and they will almost 
 Give us a prince of blood, a son of Priam, 
 In change of him: let him be sent, great princes, 
 And he shall buy my daughter; and her presence 
 Shall quite strike off all service I have done, 
 In most accepted pain. 
 AGAMEMNON  Let Diomedes bear him, 
 And bring us Cressid hither: Calchas shall have 
 What he requests of us. Good Diomed, 
 Furnish you fairly for this interchange: 
 Withal bring word if Hector will to-morrow 
 Be answer'd in his challenge: Ajax is ready. 
 DIOMEDES  This shall I undertake; and 'tis a burden 
 Which I am proud to bear. 

 Exeunt DIOMEDES and CALCHAS 
 Enter ACHILLES and PATROCLUS, before their tent  ULYSSES  Achilles stands i' the entrance of his tent: 
 Please it our general to pass strangely by him, 
 As if he were forgot; and, princes all, 
 Lay negligent and loose regard upon him: 
 I will come last. 'Tis like he'll question me 
 Why such unplausive eyes are bent on him: 
 If so, I have derision medicinable, 
 To use between your strangeness and his pride, 
 Which his own will shall have desire to drink: 
 It may be good: pride hath no other glass 
 To show itself but pride, for supple knees 
 Feed arrogance and are the proud man's fees. 
 AGAMEMNON  We'll execute your purpose, and put on 
 A form of strangeness as we pass along: 
 So do each lord, and either greet him not, 
 Or else disdainfully, which shall shake him more 
 Than if not look'd on. I will lead the way. 
 ACHILLES  What, comes the general to speak with me? 
 You know my mind, I'll fight no more 'gainst Troy. 
 AGAMEMNON  What says Achilles? would he aught with us? 
 NESTOR  Would you, my lord, aught with the general? 
 ACHILLES  No. 
 NESTOR  Nothing, my lord. 
 AGAMEMNON  The better. 

 Exeunt AGAMEMNON and NESTOR  ACHILLES  Good day, good day. 
 MENELAUS  How do you? how do you? 

 Exit  ACHILLES  What, does the cuckold scorn me? 
 AJAX  How now, Patroclus! 
 ACHILLES  Good morrow, Ajax. 
 AJAX  Ha? 
 ACHILLES  Good morrow. 
 AJAX  Ay, and good next day too. 

 Exit  ACHILLES  What mean these fellows? Know they not Achilles? 
 PATROCLUS  They pass by strangely: they were used to bend 
 To send their smiles before them to Achilles; 
 To come as humbly as they used to creep 
 To holy altars. 
 ACHILLES  What, am I poor of late? 
 'Tis certain, greatness, once fall'n out with fortune, 
 Must fall out with men too: what the declined is 
 He shall as soon read in the eyes of others 
 As feel in his own fall; for men, like butterflies, 
 Show not their mealy wings but to the summer, 
 And not a man, for being simply man, 
 Hath any honour, but honour for those honours 
 That are without him, as place, riches, favour, 
 Prizes of accident as oft as merit: 
 Which when they fall, as being slippery standers, 
 The love that lean'd on them as slippery too, 
 Do one pluck down another and together 
 Die in the fall. But 'tis not so with me: 
 Fortune and I are friends: I do enjoy 
 At ample point all that I did possess, 
 Save these men's looks; who do, methinks, find out 
 Something not worth in me such rich beholding 
 As they have often given. Here is Ulysses; 
 I'll interrupt his reading. 
 How now Ulysses! 
 ULYSSES  Now, great Thetis' son! 
 ACHILLES  What are you reading? 
 ULYSSES  A strange fellow here 
 Writes me: 'That man, how dearly ever parted, 
 How much in having, or without or in, 
 Cannot make boast to have that which he hath, 
 Nor feels not what he owes, but by reflection; 
 As when his virtues shining upon others 
 Heat them and they retort that heat again 
 To the first giver.' 
 ACHILLES  This is not strange, Ulysses. 
 The beauty that is borne here in the face 
 The bearer knows not, but commends itself 
 To others' eyes; nor doth the eye itself, 
 That most pure spirit of sense, behold itself, 
 Not going from itself; but eye to eye opposed 
 Salutes each other with each other's form; 
 For speculation turns not to itself, 
 Till it hath travell'd and is mirror'd there 
 Where it may see itself. This is not strange at all. 
 ULYSSES  I do not strain at the position,-- 
 It is familiar,--but at the author's drift; 
 Who, in his circumstance, expressly proves 
 That no man is the lord of any thing, 
 Though in and of him there be much consisting, 
 Till he communicate his parts to others: 
 Nor doth he of himself know them for aught 
 Till he behold them form'd in the applause 
 Where they're extended; who, like an arch, 
 reverberates 
 The voice again, or, like a gate of steel 
 Fronting the sun, receives and renders back 
 His figure and his heat.  I was much wrapt in this; 
 And apprehended here immediately 
 The unknown Ajax. 
 Heavens, what a man is there! a very horse, 
 That has he knows not what. Nature, what things there are 
 Most abject in regard and dear in use! 
 What things again most dear in the esteem 
 And poor in worth! Now shall we see to-morrow-- 
 An act that very chance doth throw upon him-- 
 Ajax renown'd. O heavens, what some men do, 
 While some men leave to do! 
 How some men creep in skittish fortune's hall, 
 Whiles others play the idiots in her eyes! 
 How one man eats into another's pride, 
 While pride is fasting in his wantonness! 
 To see these Grecian lords!--why, even already 
 They clap the lubber Ajax on the shoulder, 
 As if his foot were on brave Hector's breast 
 And great Troy shrieking. 
 ACHILLES  I do believe it; for they pass'd by me 
 As misers do by beggars, neither gave to me 
 Good word nor look: what, are my deeds forgot? 
 ULYSSES  Time hath, my lord, a wallet at his back, 
 Wherein he puts alms for oblivion, 
 A great-sized monster of ingratitudes: 
 Those scraps are good deeds past; which are devour'd 
 As fast as they are made, forgot as soon 
 As done: perseverance, dear my lord, 
 Keeps honour bright: to have done is to hang 
 Quite out of fashion, like a rusty mail 
 In monumental mockery. Take the instant way; 
 For honour travels in a strait so narrow, 
 Where one but goes abreast: keep then the path; 
 For emulation hath a thousand sons 
 That one by one pursue: if you give way, 
 Or hedge aside from the direct forthright, 
 Like to an enter'd tide, they all rush by 
 And leave you hindmost; 
 Or like a gallant horse fall'n in first rank, 
 Lie there for pavement to the abject rear, 
 O'er-run and trampled on: then what they do in present, 
 Though less than yours in past, must o'ertop yours; 
 For time is like a fashionable host 
 That slightly shakes his parting guest by the hand, 
 And with his arms outstretch'd, as he would fly, 
 Grasps in the comer: welcome ever smiles, 
 And farewell goes out sighing. O, let not 
 virtue seek 
 Remuneration for the thing it was; 
 For beauty, wit, 
 High birth, vigour of bone, desert in service, 
 Love, friendship, charity, are subjects all 
 To envious and calumniating time. 
 One touch of nature makes the whole world kin, 
 That all with one consent praise new-born gawds, 
 Though they are made and moulded of things past, 
 And give to dust that is a little gilt 
 More laud than gilt o'er-dusted. 
 The present eye praises the present object. 
 Then marvel not, thou great and complete man, 
 That all the Greeks begin to worship Ajax; 
 Since things in motion sooner catch the eye 
 Than what not stirs. The cry went once on thee, 
 And still it might, and yet it may again, 
 If thou wouldst not entomb thyself alive 
 And case thy reputation in thy tent; 
 Whose glorious deeds, but in these fields of late, 
 Made emulous missions 'mongst the gods themselves 
 And drave great Mars to faction. 
 ACHILLES  Of this my privacy 
 I have strong reasons. 
 ULYSSES  But 'gainst your privacy 
 The reasons are more potent and heroical: 
 'Tis known, Achilles, that you are in love 
 With one of Priam's daughters. 
 ACHILLES  Ha! known! 
 ULYSSES  Is that a wonder? 
 The providence that's in a watchful state 
 Knows almost every grain of Plutus' gold, 
 Finds bottom in the uncomprehensive deeps, 
 Keeps place with thought and almost, like the gods, 
 Does thoughts unveil in their dumb cradles. 
 There is a mystery--with whom relation 
 Durst never meddle--in the soul of state; 
 Which hath an operation more divine 
 Than breath or pen can give expressure to: 
 All the commerce that you have had with Troy 
 As perfectly is ours as yours, my lord; 
 And better would it fit Achilles much 
 To throw down Hector than Polyxena: 
 But it must grieve young Pyrrhus now at home, 
 When fame shall in our islands sound her trump, 
 And all the Greekish girls shall tripping sing, 
 'Great Hector's sister did Achilles win, 
 But our great Ajax bravely beat down him.' 
 Farewell, my lord: I as your lover speak; 
 The fool slides o'er the ice that you should break. 

 Exit  PATROCLUS  To this effect, Achilles, have I moved you: 
 A woman impudent and mannish grown 
 Is not more loathed than an effeminate man 
 In time of action. I stand condemn'd for this; 
 They think my little stomach to the war 
 And your great love to me restrains you thus: 
 Sweet, rouse yourself; and the weak wanton Cupid 
 Shall from your neck unloose his amorous fold, 
 And, like a dew-drop from the lion's mane, 
 Be shook to air. 
 ACHILLES  Shall Ajax fight with Hector? 
 PATROCLUS  Ay, and perhaps receive much honour by him. 
 ACHILLES  I see my reputation is at stake 
 My fame is shrewdly gored. 
 PATROCLUS  O, then, beware; 
 Those wounds heal ill that men do give themselves: 
 Omission to do what is necessary 
 Seals a commission to a blank of danger; 
 And danger, like an ague, subtly taints 
 Even then when we sit idly in the sun. 
 ACHILLES  Go call Thersites hither, sweet Patroclus: 
 I'll send the fool to Ajax and desire him 
 To invite the Trojan lords after the combat 
 To see us here unarm'd: I have a woman's longing, 
 An appetite that I am sick withal, 
 To see great Hector in his weeds of peace, 
 To talk with him and to behold his visage, 
 Even to my full of view. 

 Enter THERSITES  A labour saved! 
 THERSITES  A wonder! 
 ACHILLES  What? 
 THERSITES  Ajax goes up and down the field, asking for himself. 
 ACHILLES  How so? 
 THERSITES  He must fight singly to-morrow with Hector, and is so 
 prophetically proud of an heroical cudgelling that he 
 raves in saying nothing. 
 ACHILLES  How can that be? 
 THERSITES  Why, he stalks up and down like a peacock,--a stride 
 and a stand: ruminates like an hostess that hath no 
 arithmetic but her brain to set down her reckoning: 
 bites his lip with a politic regard, as who should 
 say 'There were wit in this head, an 'twould out;' 
 and so there is, but it lies as coldly in him as fire 
 in a flint, which will not show without knocking. 
 The man's undone forever; for if Hector break not his 
 neck i' the combat, he'll break 't himself in 
 vain-glory. He knows not me: I said 'Good morrow, 
 Ajax;' and he replies 'Thanks, Agamemnon.' What think 
 you of this man that takes me for the general? He's 
 grown a very land-fish, language-less, a monster. 
 A plague of opinion! a man may wear it on both 
 sides, like a leather jerkin. 
 ACHILLES  Thou must be my ambassador to him, Thersites. 
 THERSITES  Who, I? why, he'll answer nobody; he professes not 
 answering: speaking is for beggars; he wears his 
 tongue in's arms. I will put on his presence: let 
 Patroclus make demands to me, you shall see the 
 pageant of Ajax. 
 ACHILLES  To him, Patroclus; tell him I humbly desire the 
 valiant Ajax to invite the most valorous Hector 
 to come unarmed to my tent, and to procure 
 safe-conduct for his person of the magnanimous 
 and most illustrious six-or-seven-times-honoured 
 captain-general of the Grecian army, Agamemnon, 
 et cetera. Do this. 
 PATROCLUS  Jove bless great Ajax! 
 THERSITES  Hum! 
 PATROCLUS  I come from the worthy Achilles,-- 
 THERSITES  Ha! 
 PATROCLUS  Who most humbly desires you to invite Hector to his tent,-- 
 THERSITES  Hum! 
 PATROCLUS  And to procure safe-conduct from Agamemnon. 
 THERSITES  Agamemnon! 
 PATROCLUS  Ay, my lord. 
 THERSITES  Ha! 
 PATROCLUS  What say you to't? 
 THERSITES  God b' wi' you, with all my heart. 
 PATROCLUS  Your answer, sir. 
 THERSITES  If to-morrow be a fair day, by eleven o'clock it will 
 go one way or other: howsoever, he shall pay for me 
 ere he has me. 
 PATROCLUS  Your answer, sir. 
 THERSITES  Fare you well, with all my heart. 
 ACHILLES  Why, but he is not in this tune, is he? 
 THERSITES  No, but he's out o' tune thus. What music will be in 
 him when Hector has knocked out his brains, I know 
 not; but, I am sure, none, unless the fiddler Apollo 
 get his sinews to make catlings on. 
 ACHILLES  Come, thou shalt bear a letter to him straight. 
 THERSITES  Let me bear another to his horse; for that's the more 
 capable creature. 
 ACHILLES  My mind is troubled, like a fountain stirr'd; 
 And I myself see not the bottom of it. 

 Exeunt ACHILLES and PATROCLUS  THERSITES  Would the fountain of your mind were clear again, 
 that I might water an ass at it! I had rather be a 
 tick in a sheep than such a valiant ignorance. 

 Exit  Shakespeare homepage  |  Troiles and Cressida  | Act 3, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 