SCENE IV. DUKE ORSINO's palace. Twelfth Night  Shakespeare homepage  |  Twelfth Night  | Act 1, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE IV. DUKE ORSINO's palace. 
 Enter VALENTINE and VIOLA in man's attire  VALENTINE  If the duke continue these favours towards you, 
 Cesario, you are like to be much advanced: he hath 
 known you but three days, and already you are no stranger. 
 VIOLA  You either fear his humour or my negligence, that 
 you call in question the continuance of his love: 
 is he inconstant, sir, in his favours? 
 VALENTINE  No, believe me. 
 VIOLA  I thank you. Here comes the count. 

 Enter DUKE ORSINO, CURIO, and Attendants  DUKE ORSINO  Who saw Cesario, ho? 
 VIOLA  On your attendance, my lord; here. 
 DUKE ORSINO  Stand you a while aloof, Cesario, 
 Thou know'st no less but all; I have unclasp'd 
 To thee the book even of my secret soul: 
 Therefore, good youth, address thy gait unto her; 
 Be not denied access, stand at her doors, 
 And tell them, there thy fixed foot shall grow 
 Till thou have audience. 
 VIOLA  Sure, my noble lord, 
 If she be so abandon'd to her sorrow 
 As it is spoke, she never will admit me. 
 DUKE ORSINO  Be clamorous and leap all civil bounds 
 Rather than make unprofited return. 
 VIOLA  Say I do speak with her, my lord, what then? 
 DUKE ORSINO  O, then unfold the passion of my love, 
 Surprise her with discourse of my dear faith: 
 It shall become thee well to act my woes; 
 She will attend it better in thy youth 
 Than in a nuncio's of more grave aspect. 
 VIOLA  I think not so, my lord. 
 DUKE ORSINO  Dear lad, believe it; 
 For they shall yet belie thy happy years, 
 That say thou art a man: Diana's lip 
 Is not more smooth and rubious; thy small pipe 
 Is as the maiden's organ, shrill and sound, 
 And all is semblative a woman's part. 
 I know thy constellation is right apt 
 For this affair. Some four or five attend him; 
 All, if you will; for I myself am best 
 When least in company. Prosper well in this, 
 And thou shalt live as freely as thy lord, 
 To call his fortunes thine. 
 VIOLA  I'll do my best 
 To woo your lady: 

 Aside  yet, a barful strife! 
 Whoe'er I woo, myself would be his wife. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Twelfth Night  | Act 1, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 