SCENE I. London. The palace. The First part of King Henry the Sixth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 1  | Act 5, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. London. The palace. 
 Sennet. Enter KING HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER, and EXETER  KING HENRY VI  Have you perused the letters from the pope, 
 The emperor and the Earl of Armagnac? 
 GLOUCESTER  I have, my lord: and their intent is this: 
 They humbly sue unto your excellence 
 To have a godly peace concluded of 
 Between the realms of England and of France. 
 KING HENRY VI  How doth your grace affect their motion? 
 GLOUCESTER  Well, my good lord; and as the only means 
 To stop effusion of our Christian blood 
 And 'stablish quietness on every side. 
 KING HENRY VI  Ay, marry, uncle; for I always thought 
 It was both impious and unnatural 
 That such immanity and bloody strife 
 Should reign among professors of one faith. 
 GLOUCESTER  Beside, my lord, the sooner to effect 
 And surer bind this knot of amity, 
 The Earl of Armagnac, near knit to Charles, 
 A man of great authority in France, 
 Proffers his only daughter to your grace 
 In marriage, with a large and sumptuous dowry. 
 KING HENRY VI  Marriage, uncle! alas, my years are young! 
 And fitter is my study and my books 
 Than wanton dalliance with a paramour. 
 Yet call the ambassador; and, as you please, 
 So let them have their answers every one: 
 I shall be well content with any choice 
 Tends to God's glory and my country's weal. 

 Enter CARDINAL OF WINCHESTER in Cardinal's habit, a Legate and two Ambassadors  EXETER  What! is my Lord of Winchester install'd, 
 And call'd unto a cardinal's degree? 
 Then I perceive that will be verified 
 Henry the Fifth did sometime prophesy, 
 'If once he come to be a cardinal, 
 He'll make his cap co-equal with the crown.' 
 KING HENRY VI  My lords ambassadors, your several suits 
 Have been consider'd and debated on. 
 And therefore are we certainly resolved 
 To draw conditions of a friendly peace; 
 Which by my Lord of Winchester we mean 
 Shall be transported presently to France. 
 GLOUCESTER  And for the proffer of my lord your master, 
 I have inform'd his highness so at large 
 As liking of the lady's virtuous gifts, 
 Her beauty and the value of her dower, 
 He doth intend she shall be England's queen. 
 KING HENRY VI  In argument and proof of which contract, 
 Bear her this jewel, pledge of my affection. 
 And so, my lord protector, see them guarded 
 And safely brought to Dover; where inshipp'd 
 Commit them to the fortune of the sea. 

 Exeunt all but CARDINAL OF WINCHESTER and Legate  CARDINAL 
 OF WINCHESTER  Stay, my lord legate: you shall first receive 
 The sum of money which I promised 
 Should be deliver'd to his holiness 
 For clothing me in these grave ornaments. 
 Legate  I will attend upon your lordship's leisure. 
 CARDINAL 
 OF WINCHESTER  [Aside]  Now Winchester will not submit, I trow, 
 Or be inferior to the proudest peer. 
 Humphrey of Gloucester, thou shalt well perceive 
 That, neither in birth or for authority, 
 The bishop will be overborne by thee: 
 I'll either make thee stoop and bend thy knee, 
 Or sack this country with a mutiny. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 1  | Act 5, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 