SCENE IV. Another part of the field. The First part of King Henry the Fourth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry IV, part 1  | Act 5, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE IV. Another part of the field. 
 Alarum. Excursions. Enter PRINCE HENRY, LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER, and EARL OF WESTMORELAND  KING HENRY IV  I prithee, 
 Harry, withdraw thyself; thou bleed'st too much. 
 Lord John of Lancaster, go you with him. 
 LANCASTER  Not I, my lord, unless I did bleed too. 
 PRINCE HENRY  I beseech your majesty, make up, 
 Lest your retirement do amaze your friends. 
 KING HENRY IV  I will do so. 
 My Lord of Westmoreland, lead him to his tent. 
 WESTMORELAND  Come, my lord, I'll lead you to your tent. 
 PRINCE HENRY  Lead me, my lord? I do not need your help: 
 And God forbid a shallow scratch should drive 
 The Prince of Wales from such a field as this, 
 Where stain'd nobility lies trodden on, 
 and rebels' arms triumph in massacres! 
 LANCASTER  We breathe too long: come, cousin Westmoreland, 
 Our duty this way lies; for God's sake come. 

 Exeunt LANCASTER and WESTMORELAND  PRINCE HENRY  By God, thou hast deceived me, Lancaster; 
 I did not think thee lord of such a spirit: 
 Before, I loved thee as a brother, John; 
 But now, I do respect thee as my soul. 
 KING HENRY IV  I saw him hold Lord Percy at the point 
 With lustier maintenance than I did look for 
 Of such an ungrown warrior. 
 PRINCE HENRY  O, this boy 
 Lends mettle to us all! 

 Exit 
 Enter DOUGLAS  EARL OF DOUGLAS  Another king! they grow like Hydra's heads: 
 I am the Douglas, fatal to all those 
 That wear those colours on them: what art thou, 
 That counterfeit'st the person of a king? 
 KING HENRY IV  The king himself; who, Douglas, grieves at heart 
 So many of his shadows thou hast met 
 And not the very king. I have two boys 
 Seek Percy and thyself about the field: 
 But, seeing thou fall'st on me so luckily, 
 I will assay thee: so, defend thyself. 
 EARL OF DOUGLAS  I fear thou art another counterfeit; 
 And yet, in faith, thou bear'st thee like a king: 
 But mine I am sure thou art, whoe'er thou be, 
 And thus I win thee. 

 They fight. KING HENRY being in danger, PRINCE HENRY enters  PRINCE HENRY  Hold up thy head, vile Scot, or thou art like 
 Never to hold it up again! the spirits 
 Of valiant Shirley, Stafford, Blunt, are in my arms: 
 It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee; 
 Who never promiseth but he means to pay. 

 They fight: DOUGLAS flies  Cheerly, my lord	how fares your grace? 
 Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for succor sent, 
 And so hath Clifton: I'll to Clifton straight. 
 KING HENRY IV  Stay, and breathe awhile: 
 Thou hast redeem'd thy lost opinion, 
 And show'd thou makest some tender of my life, 
 In this fair rescue thou hast brought to me. 
 PRINCE HENRY  O God! they did me too much injury 
 That ever said I hearken'd for your death. 
 If it were so, I might have let alone 
 The insulting hand of Douglas over you, 
 Which would have been as speedy in your end 
 As all the poisonous potions in the world 
 And saved the treacherous labour of your son. 
 KING HENRY IV  Make up to Clifton: I'll to Sir Nicholas Gawsey. 

 Exit 
 Enter HOTSPUR  HOTSPUR  If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth. 
 PRINCE HENRY  Thou speak'st as if I would deny my name. 
 HOTSPUR  My name is Harry Percy. 
 PRINCE HENRY  Why, then I see 
 A very valiant rebel of the name. 
 I am the Prince of Wales; and think not, Percy, 
 To share with me in glory any more: 
 Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere; 
 Nor can one England brook a double reign, 
 Of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales. 
 HOTSPUR  Nor shall it, Harry; for the hour is come 
 To end the one of us; and would to God 
 Thy name in arms were now as great as mine! 
 PRINCE HENRY  I'll make it greater ere I part from thee; 
 And all the budding honours on thy crest 
 I'll crop, to make a garland for my head. 
 HOTSPUR  I can no longer brook thy vanities. 

 They fight 
 Enter FALSTAFF  FALSTAFF  Well said, Hal! to it Hal! Nay, you shall find no 
 boy's play here, I can tell you. 

 Re-enter DOUGLAS; he fights with FALSTAFF,  who falls down as if he were dead, and exit DOUGLAS. HOTSPUR is wounded, and falls  HOTSPUR  O, Harry, thou hast robb'd me of my youth! 
 I better brook the loss of brittle life 
 Than those proud titles thou hast won of me; 
 They wound my thoughts worse than sword my flesh: 
 But thought's the slave of life, and life time's fool; 
 And time, that takes survey of all the world, 
 Must have a stop. O, I could prophesy, 
 But that the earthy and cold hand of death 
 Lies on my tongue: no, Percy, thou art dust 
 And food for-- 

 Dies  PRINCE HENRY  For worms, brave Percy: fare thee well, great heart! 
 Ill-weaved ambition, how much art thou shrunk! 
 When that this body did contain a spirit, 
 A kingdom for it was too small a bound; 
 But now two paces of the vilest earth 
 Is room enough: this earth that bears thee dead 
 Bears not alive so stout a gentleman. 
 If thou wert sensible of courtesy, 
 I should not make so dear a show of zeal: 
 But let my favours hide thy mangled face; 
 And, even in thy behalf, I'll thank myself 
 For doing these fair rites of tenderness. 
 Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven! 
 Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave, 
 But not remember'd in thy epitaph! 

 He spieth FALSTAFF on the ground  What, old acquaintance! could not all this flesh 
 Keep in a little life? Poor Jack, farewell! 
 I could have better spared a better man: 
 O, I should have a heavy miss of thee, 
 If I were much in love with vanity! 
 Death hath not struck so fat a deer to-day, 
 Though many dearer, in this bloody fray. 
 Embowell'd will I see thee by and by: 
 Till then in blood by noble Percy lie. 

 Exit PRINCE HENRY  FALSTAFF  [Rising up]  Embowelled! if thou embowel me to-day, 
 I'll give you leave to powder me and eat me too 
 to-morrow. 'Sblood,'twas time to counterfeit, or 
 that hot termagant Scot had paid me scot and lot too. 
 Counterfeit? I lie, I am no counterfeit: to die, 
 is to be a counterfeit; for he is but the 
 counterfeit of a man who hath not the life of a man: 
 but to counterfeit dying, when a man thereby 
 liveth, is to be no counterfeit, but the true and 
 perfect image of life indeed. The better part of 
 valour is discretion; in the which better part I 
 have saved my life.'Zounds, I am afraid of this 
 gunpowder Percy, though he be dead: how, if he 
 should counterfeit too and rise? by my faith, I am 
 afraid he would prove the better counterfeit. 
 Therefore I'll make him sure; yea, and I'll swear I 
 killed him. Why may not he rise as well as I? 
 Nothing confutes me but eyes, and nobody sees me. 
 Therefore, sirrah, 

 Stabbing him  with a new wound in your thigh, come you along with me. 

 Takes up HOTSPUR on his back 
 Re-enter PRINCE HENRY and LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER  PRINCE HENRY  Come, brother John; full bravely hast thou flesh'd 
 Thy maiden sword. 
 LANCASTER  But, soft! whom have we here? 
 Did you not tell me this fat man was dead? 
 PRINCE HENRY  I did; I saw him dead, 
 Breathless and bleeding on the ground. Art 
 thou alive? 
 Or is it fantasy that plays upon our eyesight? 
 I prithee, speak; we will not trust our eyes 
 Without our ears: thou art not what thou seem'st. 
 FALSTAFF  No, that's certain; I am not a double man: but if I 
 be not Jack Falstaff, then am I a Jack. There is Percy: 

 Throwing the body down  if your father will do me any honour, so; if not, let 
 him kill the next Percy himself. I look to be either 
 earl or duke, I can assure you. 
 PRINCE HENRY  Why, Percy I killed myself and saw thee dead. 
 FALSTAFF  Didst thou? Lord, Lord, how this world is given to 
 lying! I grant you I was down and out of breath; 
 and so was he: but we rose both at an instant and 
 fought a long hour by Shrewsbury clock. If I may be 
 believed, so; if not, let them that should reward 
 valour bear the sin upon their own heads. I'll take 
 it upon my death, I gave him this wound in the 
 thigh: if the man were alive and would deny it, 
 'zounds, I would make him eat a piece of my sword. 
 LANCASTER  This is the strangest tale that ever I heard. 
 PRINCE HENRY  This is the strangest fellow, brother John. 
 Come, bring your luggage nobly on your back: 
 For my part, if a lie may do thee grace, 
 I'll gild it with the happiest terms I have. 

 A retreat is sounded  The trumpet sounds retreat; the day is ours. 
 Come, brother, let us to the highest of the field, 
 To see what friends are living, who are dead. 

 Exeunt PRINCE HENRY and LANCASTER  FALSTAFF  I'll follow, as they say, for reward. He that 
 rewards me, God reward him! If I do grow great, 
 I'll grow less; for I'll purge, and leave sack, and 
 live cleanly as a nobleman should do. 

 Exit  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry IV, part 1  | Act 5, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 