SCENE III. London. The palace. The First part of King Henry the Fourth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry IV, part 1  | Act 1, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. London. The palace. 
 Enter the KING, NORTHUMBERLAND, WORCESTER, HOTSPUR, SIR WALTER BLUNT, with others  KING HENRY IV  My blood hath been too cold and temperate, 
 Unapt to stir at these indignities, 
 And you have found me; for accordingly 
 You tread upon my patience: but be sure 
 I will from henceforth rather be myself, 
 Mighty and to be fear'd, than my condition; 
 Which hath been smooth as oil, soft as young down, 
 And therefore lost that title of respect 
 Which the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud. 
 EARL OF WORCESTER  Our house, my sovereign liege, little deserves 
 The scourge of greatness to be used on it; 
 And that same greatness too which our own hands 
 Have holp to make so portly. 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  My lord.-- 
 KING HENRY IV  Worcester, get thee gone; for I do see 
 Danger and disobedience in thine eye: 
 O, sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory, 
 And majesty might never yet endure 
 The moody frontier of a servant brow. 
 You have good leave to leave us: when we need 
 Your use and counsel, we shall send for you. 

 Exit Worcester  You were about to speak. 

 To North  NORTHUMBERLAND  Yea, my good lord. 
 Those prisoners in your highness' name demanded, 
 Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took, 
 Were, as he says, not with such strength denied 
 As is deliver'd to your majesty: 
 Either envy, therefore, or misprison 
 Is guilty of this fault and not my son. 
 HOTSPUR  My liege, I did deny no prisoners. 
 But I remember, when the fight was done, 
 When I was dry with rage and extreme toil, 
 Breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword, 
 Came there a certain lord, neat, and trimly dress'd, 
 Fresh as a bridegroom; and his chin new reap'd 
 Show'd like a stubble-land at harvest-home; 
 He was perfumed like a milliner; 
 And 'twixt his finger and his thumb he held 
 A pouncet-box, which ever and anon 
 He gave his nose and took't away again; 
 Who therewith angry, when it next came there, 
 Took it in snuff; and still he smiled and talk'd, 
 And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by, 
 He call'd them untaught knaves, unmannerly, 
 To bring a slovenly unhandsome corse 
 Betwixt the wind and his nobility. 
 With many holiday and lady terms 
 He question'd me; amongst the rest, demanded 
 My prisoners in your majesty's behalf. 
 I then, all smarting with my wounds being cold, 
 To be so pester'd with a popinjay, 
 Out of my grief and my impatience, 
 Answer'd neglectingly I know not what, 
 He should or he should not; for he made me mad 
 To see him shine so brisk and smell so sweet 
 And talk so like a waiting-gentlewoman 
 Of guns and drums and wounds,--God save the mark!-- 
 And telling me the sovereign'st thing on earth 
 Was parmaceti for an inward bruise; 
 And that it was great pity, so it was, 
 This villanous salt-petre should be digg'd 
 Out of the bowels of the harmless earth, 
 Which many a good tall fellow had destroy'd 
 So cowardly; and but for these vile guns, 
 He would himself have been a soldier. 
 This bald unjointed chat of his, my lord, 
 I answer'd indirectly, as I said; 
 And I beseech you, let not his report 
 Come current for an accusation 
 Betwixt my love and your high majesty. 
 SIR WALTER BLUNT  The circumstance consider'd, good my lord, 
 Whate'er Lord Harry Percy then had said 
 To such a person and in such a place, 
 At such a time, with all the rest retold, 
 May reasonably die and never rise 
 To do him wrong or any way impeach 
 What then he said, so he unsay it now. 
 KING HENRY IV  Why, yet he doth deny his prisoners, 
 But with proviso and exception, 
 That we at our own charge shall ransom straight 
 His brother-in-law, the foolish Mortimer; 
 Who, on my soul, hath wilfully betray'd 
 The lives of those that he did lead to fight 
 Against that great magician, damn'd Glendower, 
 Whose daughter, as we hear, the Earl of March 
 Hath lately married. Shall our coffers, then, 
 Be emptied to redeem a traitor home? 
 Shall we but treason? and indent with fears, 
 When they have lost and forfeited themselves? 
 No, on the barren mountains let him starve; 
 For I shall never hold that man my friend 
 Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost 
 To ransom home revolted Mortimer. 
 HOTSPUR  Revolted Mortimer! 
 He never did fall off, my sovereign liege, 
 But by the chance of war; to prove that true 
 Needs no more but one tongue for all those wounds, 
 Those mouthed wounds, which valiantly he took 
 When on the gentle Severn's sedgy bank, 
 In single opposition, hand to hand, 
 He did confound the best part of an hour 
 In changing hardiment with great Glendower: 
 Three times they breathed and three times did 
 they drink, 
 Upon agreement, of swift Severn's flood; 
 Who then, affrighted with their bloody looks, 
 Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds, 
 And hid his crisp head in the hollow bank, 
 Bloodstained with these valiant combatants. 
 Never did base and rotten policy 
 Colour her working with such deadly wounds; 
 Nor could the noble Mortimer 
 Receive so many, and all willingly: 
 Then let not him be slander'd with revolt. 
 KING HENRY IV  Thou dost belie him, Percy, thou dost belie him; 
 He never did encounter with Glendower: 
 I tell thee, 
 He durst as well have met the devil alone 
 As Owen Glendower for an enemy. 
 Art thou not ashamed? But, sirrah, henceforth 
 Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer: 
 Send me your prisoners with the speediest means, 
 Or you shall hear in such a kind from me 
 As will displease you. My Lord Northumberland, 
 We licence your departure with your son. 
 Send us your prisoners, or you will hear of it. 

 Exeunt King Henry, Blunt, and train  HOTSPUR  An if the devil come and roar for them, 
 I will not send them: I will after straight 
 And tell him so; for I will ease my heart, 
 Albeit I make a hazard of my head. 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  What, drunk with choler? stay and pause awhile: 
 Here comes your uncle. 

 Re-enter WORCESTER  HOTSPUR  Speak of Mortimer! 
 'Zounds, I will speak of him; and let my soul 
 Want mercy, if I do not join with him: 
 Yea, on his part I'll empty all these veins, 
 And shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust, 
 But I will lift the down-trod Mortimer 
 As high in the air as this unthankful king, 
 As this ingrate and canker'd Bolingbroke. 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  Brother, the king hath made your nephew mad. 
 EARL OF WORCESTER  Who struck this heat up after I was gone? 
 HOTSPUR  He will, forsooth, have all my prisoners; 
 And when I urged the ransom once again 
 Of my wife's brother, then his cheek look'd pale, 
 And on my face he turn'd an eye of death, 
 Trembling even at the name of Mortimer. 
 EARL OF WORCESTER  I cannot blame him: was not he proclaim'd 
 By Richard that dead is the next of blood? 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  He was; I heard the proclamation: 
 And then it was when the unhappy king, 
 --Whose wrongs in us God pardon!--did set forth 
 Upon his Irish expedition; 
 From whence he intercepted did return 
 To be deposed and shortly murdered. 
 EARL OF WORCESTER  And for whose death we in the world's wide mouth 
 Live scandalized and foully spoken of. 
 HOTSPUR  But soft, I pray you; did King Richard then 
 Proclaim my brother Edmund Mortimer 
 Heir to the crown? 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  He did; myself did hear it. 
 HOTSPUR  Nay, then I cannot blame his cousin king, 
 That wished him on the barren mountains starve. 
 But shall it be that you, that set the crown 
 Upon the head of this forgetful man 
 And for his sake wear the detested blot 
 Of murderous subornation, shall it be, 
 That you a world of curses undergo, 
 Being the agents, or base second means, 
 The cords, the ladder, or the hangman rather? 
 O, pardon me that I descend so low, 
 To show the line and the predicament 
 Wherein you range under this subtle king; 
 Shall it for shame be spoken in these days, 
 Or fill up chronicles in time to come, 
 That men of your nobility and power 
 Did gage them both in an unjust behalf, 
 As both of you--God pardon it!--have done, 
 To put down Richard, that sweet lovely rose, 
 An plant this thorn, this canker, Bolingbroke? 
 And shall it in more shame be further spoken, 
 That you are fool'd, discarded and shook off 
 By him for whom these shames ye underwent? 
 No; yet time serves wherein you may redeem 
 Your banish'd honours and restore yourselves 
 Into the good thoughts of the world again, 
 Revenge the jeering and disdain'd contempt 
 Of this proud king, who studies day and night 
 To answer all the debt he owes to you 
 Even with the bloody payment of your deaths: 
 Therefore, I say-- 
 EARL OF WORCESTER  Peace, cousin, say no more: 
 And now I will unclasp a secret book, 
 And to your quick-conceiving discontents 
 I'll read you matter deep and dangerous, 
 As full of peril and adventurous spirit 
 As to o'er-walk a current roaring loud 
 On the unsteadfast footing of a spear. 
 HOTSPUR  If he fall in, good night! or sink or swim: 
 Send danger from the east unto the west, 
 So honour cross it from the north to south, 
 And let them grapple: O, the blood more stirs 
 To rouse a lion than to start a hare! 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  Imagination of some great exploit 
 Drives him beyond the bounds of patience. 
 HOTSPUR  By heaven, methinks it were an easy leap, 
 To pluck bright honour from the pale-faced moon, 
 Or dive into the bottom of the deep, 
 Where fathom-line could never touch the ground, 
 And pluck up drowned honour by the locks; 
 So he that doth redeem her thence might wear 
 Without corrival, all her dignities: 
 But out upon this half-faced fellowship! 
 EARL OF WORCESTER  He apprehends a world of figures here, 
 But not the form of what he should attend. 
 Good cousin, give me audience for a while. 
 HOTSPUR  I cry you mercy. 
 EARL OF WORCESTER  Those same noble Scots 
 That are your prisoners,-- 
 HOTSPUR  I'll keep them all; 
 By God, he shall not have a Scot of them; 
 No, if a Scot would save his soul, he shall not: 
 I'll keep them, by this hand. 
 EARL OF WORCESTER  You start away 
 And lend no ear unto my purposes. 
 Those prisoners you shall keep. 
 HOTSPUR  Nay, I will; that's flat: 
 He said he would not ransom Mortimer; 
 Forbad my tongue to speak of Mortimer; 
 But I will find him when he lies asleep, 
 And in his ear I'll holla 'Mortimer!' 
 Nay, 
 I'll have a starling shall be taught to speak 
 Nothing but 'Mortimer,' and give it him 
 To keep his anger still in motion. 
 EARL OF WORCESTER  Hear you, cousin; a word. 
 HOTSPUR  All studies here I solemnly defy, 
 Save how to gall and pinch this Bolingbroke: 
 And that same sword-and-buckler Prince of Wales, 
 But that I think his father loves him not 
 And would be glad he met with some mischance, 
 I would have him poison'd with a pot of ale. 
 EARL OF WORCESTER  Farewell, kinsman: I'll talk to you 
 When you are better temper'd to attend. 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  Why, what a wasp-stung and impatient fool 
 Art thou to break into this woman's mood, 
 Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own! 
 HOTSPUR  Why, look you, I am whipp'd and scourged with rods, 
 Nettled and stung with pismires, when I hear 
 Of this vile politician, Bolingbroke. 
 In Richard's time,--what do you call the place?-- 
 A plague upon it, it is in Gloucestershire; 
 'Twas where the madcap duke his uncle kept, 
 His uncle York; where I first bow'd my knee 
 Unto this king of smiles, this Bolingbroke,-- 
 'Sblood!-- 
 When you and he came back from Ravenspurgh. 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  At Berkley castle. 
 HOTSPUR  You say true: 
 Why, what a candy deal of courtesy 
 This fawning greyhound then did proffer me! 
 Look,'when his infant fortune came to age,' 
 And 'gentle Harry Percy,' and 'kind cousin;' 
 O, the devil take such cozeners! God forgive me! 
 Good uncle, tell your tale; I have done. 
 EARL OF WORCESTER  Nay, if you have not, to it again; 
 We will stay your leisure. 
 HOTSPUR  I have done, i' faith. 
 EARL OF WORCESTER  Then once more to your Scottish prisoners. 
 Deliver them up without their ransom straight, 
 And make the Douglas' son your only mean 
 For powers in Scotland; which, for divers reasons 
 Which I shall send you written, be assured, 
 Will easily be granted. You, my lord, 

 To Northumberland  Your son in Scotland being thus employ'd, 
 Shall secretly into the bosom creep 
 Of that same noble prelate, well beloved, 
 The archbishop. 
 HOTSPUR  Of York, is it not? 
 EARL OF WORCESTER  True; who bears hard 
 His brother's death at Bristol, the Lord Scroop. 
 I speak not this in estimation, 
 As what I think might be, but what I know 
 Is ruminated, plotted and set down, 
 And only stays but to behold the face 
 Of that occasion that shall bring it on. 
 HOTSPUR  I smell it: upon my life, it will do well. 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  Before the game is afoot, thou still let'st slip. 
 HOTSPUR  Why, it cannot choose but be a noble plot; 
 And then the power of Scotland and of York, 
 To join with Mortimer, ha? 
 EARL OF WORCESTER  And so they shall. 
 HOTSPUR  In faith, it is exceedingly well aim'd. 
 EARL OF WORCESTER  And 'tis no little reason bids us speed, 
 To save our heads by raising of a head; 
 For, bear ourselves as even as we can, 
 The king will always think him in our debt, 
 And think we think ourselves unsatisfied, 
 Till he hath found a time to pay us home: 
 And see already how he doth begin 
 To make us strangers to his looks of love. 
 HOTSPUR  He does, he does: we'll be revenged on him. 
 EARL OF WORCESTER  Cousin, farewell: no further go in this 
 Than I by letters shall direct your course. 
 When time is ripe, which will be suddenly, 
 I'll steal to Glendower and Lord Mortimer; 
 Where you and Douglas and our powers at once, 
 As I will fashion it, shall happily meet, 
 To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms, 
 Which now we hold at much uncertainty. 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  Farewell, good brother: we shall thrive, I trust. 
 HOTSPUR  Uncle, Adieu: O, let the hours be short 
 Till fields and blows and groans applaud our sport! 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry IV, part 1  | Act 1, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 