SCENE III. Warkworth castle The First part of King Henry the Fourth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry IV, part 1  | Act 2, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. Warkworth castle 
 Enter HOTSPUR, solus, reading a letter  HOTSPUR  'But for mine own part, my lord, I could be well 
 contented to be there, in respect of the love I bear 
 your house.' He could be contented: why is he not, 
 then? In respect of the love he bears our house: 
 he shows in this, he loves his own barn better than 
 he loves our house. Let me see some more. 'The 
 purpose you undertake is dangerous;'--why, that's 
 certain: 'tis dangerous to take a cold, to sleep, to 
 drink; but I tell you, my lord fool, out of this 
 nettle, danger, we pluck this flower, safety. 'The 
 purpose you undertake is dangerous; the friends you 
 have named uncertain; the time itself unsorted; and 
 your whole plot too light for the counterpoise of so 
 great an opposition.' Say you so, say you so? I say 
 unto you again, you are a shallow cowardly hind, and 
 you lie.  What a lack-brain is this! By the Lord, 
 our plot is a good plot as ever was laid; our 
 friends true and constant: a good plot, good 
 friends, and full of expectation; an excellent plot, 
 very good friends. What a frosty-spirited rogue is 
 this! Why, my lord of York commends the plot and the 
 general course of action. 'Zounds, an I were now by 
 this rascal, I could brain him with his lady's fan. 
 Is there not my father, my uncle and myself? lord 
 Edmund Mortimer, My lord of York and Owen Glendower? 
 is there not besides the Douglas? have I not all 
 their letters to meet me in arms by the ninth of the 
 next month? and are they not some of them set 
 forward already? What a pagan rascal is this! an 
 infidel! Ha! you shall see now in very sincerity 
 of fear and cold heart, will he to the king and lay 
 open all our proceedings. O, I could divide myself 
 and go to buffets, for moving such a dish of 
 skim milk with so honourable an action! Hang him! 
 let him tell the king: we are prepared. I will set 
 forward to-night. 

 Enter LADY PERCY  How now, Kate! I must leave you within these two hours. 
 LADY PERCY  O, my good lord, why are you thus alone? 
 For what offence have I this fortnight been 
 A banish'd woman from my Harry's bed? 
 Tell me, sweet lord, what is't that takes from thee 
 Thy stomach, pleasure and thy golden sleep? 
 Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth, 
 And start so often when thou sit'st alone? 
 Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks; 
 And given my treasures and my rights of thee 
 To thick-eyed musing and cursed melancholy? 
 In thy faint slumbers I by thee have watch'd, 
 And heard thee murmur tales of iron wars; 
 Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed; 
 Cry 'Courage! to the field!' And thou hast talk'd 
 Of sallies and retires, of trenches, tents, 
 Of palisadoes, frontiers, parapets, 
 Of basilisks, of cannon, culverin, 
 Of prisoners' ransom and of soldiers slain, 
 And all the currents of a heady fight. 
 Thy spirit within thee hath been so at war 
 And thus hath so bestirr'd thee in thy sleep, 
 That beads of sweat have stood upon thy brow 
 Like bubbles in a late-disturbed stream; 
 And in thy face strange motions have appear'd, 
 Such as we see when men restrain their breath 
 On some great sudden hest. O, what portents are these? 
 Some heavy business hath my lord in hand, 
 And I must know it, else he loves me not. 
 HOTSPUR  What, ho! 

 Enter Servant  Is Gilliams with the packet gone? 
 Servant  He is, my lord, an hour ago. 
 HOTSPUR  Hath Butler brought those horses from the sheriff? 
 Servant  One horse, my lord, he brought even now. 
 HOTSPUR  What horse? a roan, a crop-ear, is it not? 
 Servant  It is, my lord. 
 HOTSPUR  That roan shall by my throne. 
 Well, I will back him straight: O esperance! 
 Bid Butler lead him forth into the park. 

 Exit Servant  LADY PERCY  But hear you, my lord. 
 HOTSPUR  What say'st thou, my lady? 
 LADY PERCY  What is it carries you away? 
 HOTSPUR  Why, my horse, my love, my horse. 
 LADY PERCY  Out, you mad-headed ape! 
 A weasel hath not such a deal of spleen 
 As you are toss'd with. In faith, 
 I'll know your business, Harry, that I will. 
 I fear my brother Mortimer doth stir 
 About his title, and hath sent for you 
 To line his enterprise: but if you go,-- 
 HOTSPUR  So far afoot, I shall be weary, love. 
 LADY PERCY  Come, come, you paraquito, answer me 
 Directly unto this question that I ask: 
 In faith, I'll break thy little finger, Harry, 
 An if thou wilt not tell me all things true. 
 HOTSPUR  Away, 
 Away, you trifler! Love! I love thee not, 
 I care not for thee, Kate: this is no world 
 To play with mammets and to tilt with lips: 
 We must have bloody noses and crack'd crowns, 
 And pass them current too. God's me, my horse! 
 What say'st thou, Kate? what would'st thou 
 have with me? 
 LADY PERCY  Do you not love me? do you not, indeed? 
 Well, do not then; for since you love me not, 
 I will not love myself. Do you not love me? 
 Nay, tell me if you speak in jest or no. 
 HOTSPUR  Come, wilt thou see me ride? 
 And when I am on horseback, I will swear 
 I love thee infinitely. But hark you, Kate; 
 I must not have you henceforth question me 
 Whither I go, nor reason whereabout: 
 Whither I must, I must; and, to conclude, 
 This evening must I leave you, gentle Kate. 
 I know you wise, but yet no farther wise 
 Than Harry Percy's wife: constant you are, 
 But yet a woman: and for secrecy, 
 No lady closer; for I well believe 
 Thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know; 
 And so far will I trust thee, gentle Kate. 
 LADY PERCY  How! so far? 
 HOTSPUR  Not an inch further. But hark you, Kate: 
 Whither I go, thither shall you go too; 
 To-day will I set forth, to-morrow you. 
 Will this content you, Kate? 
 LADY PERCY  It must of force. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry IV, part 1  | Act 2, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 