SCENE I. London. The palace. The First part of King Henry the Fourth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry IV, part 1  | Act 1, Scene 1 
 Next scene  SCENE I. London. The palace. 
 Enter KING HENRY, LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER, the EARL of WESTMORELAND, SIR WALTER BLUNT, and others  KING HENRY IV  So shaken as we are, so wan with care, 
 Find we a time for frighted peace to pant, 
 And breathe short-winded accents of new broils 
 To be commenced in strands afar remote. 
 No more the thirsty entrance of this soil 
 Shall daub her lips with her own children's blood; 
 Nor more shall trenching war channel her fields, 
 Nor bruise her flowerets with the armed hoofs 
 Of hostile paces: those opposed eyes, 
 Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven, 
 All of one nature, of one substance bred, 
 Did lately meet in the intestine shock 
 And furious close of civil butchery 
 Shall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks, 
 March all one way and be no more opposed 
 Against acquaintance, kindred and allies: 
 The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife, 
 No more shall cut his master. Therefore, friends, 
 As far as to the sepulchre of Christ, 
 Whose soldier now, under whose blessed cross 
 We are impressed and engaged to fight, 
 Forthwith a power of English shall we levy; 
 Whose arms were moulded in their mothers' womb 
 To chase these pagans in those holy fields 
 Over whose acres walk'd those blessed feet 
 Which fourteen hundred years ago were nail'd 
 For our advantage on the bitter cross. 
 But this our purpose now is twelve month old, 
 And bootless 'tis to tell you we will go: 
 Therefore we meet not now. Then let me hear 
 Of you, my gentle cousin Westmoreland, 
 What yesternight our council did decree 
 In forwarding this dear expedience. 
 WESTMORELAND  My liege, this haste was hot in question, 
 And many limits of the charge set down 
 But yesternight: when all athwart there came 
 A post from Wales loaden with heavy news; 
 Whose worst was, that the noble Mortimer, 
 Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight 
 Against the irregular and wild Glendower, 
 Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken, 
 A thousand of his people butchered; 
 Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse, 
 Such beastly shameless transformation, 
 By those Welshwomen done as may not be 
 Without much shame retold or spoken of. 
 KING HENRY IV  It seems then that the tidings of this broil 
 Brake off our business for the Holy Land. 
 WESTMORELAND  This match'd with other did, my gracious lord; 
 For more uneven and unwelcome news 
 Came from the north and thus it did import: 
 On Holy-rood day, the gallant Hotspur there, 
 Young Harry Percy and brave Archibald, 
 That ever-valiant and approved Scot, 
 At Holmedon met, 
 Where they did spend a sad and bloody hour, 
 As by discharge of their artillery, 
 And shape of likelihood, the news was told; 
 For he that brought them, in the very heat 
 And pride of their contention did take horse, 
 Uncertain of the issue any way. 
 KING HENRY IV  Here is a dear, a true industrious friend, 
 Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his horse. 
 Stain'd with the variation of each soil 
 Betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours; 
 And he hath brought us smooth and welcome news. 
 The Earl of Douglas is discomfited: 
 Ten thousand bold Scots, two and twenty knights, 
 Balk'd in their own blood did Sir Walter see 
 On Holmedon's plains. Of prisoners, Hotspur took 
 Mordake the Earl of Fife, and eldest son 
 To beaten Douglas; and the Earl of Athol, 
 Of Murray, Angus, and Menteith: 
 And is not this an honourable spoil? 
 A gallant prize? ha, cousin, is it not? 
 WESTMORELAND  In faith, 
 It is a conquest for a prince to boast of. 
 KING HENRY IV  Yea, there thou makest me sad and makest me sin 
 In envy that my Lord Northumberland 
 Should be the father to so blest a son, 
 A son who is the theme of honour's tongue; 
 Amongst a grove, the very straightest plant; 
 Who is sweet Fortune's minion and her pride: 
 Whilst I, by looking on the praise of him, 
 See riot and dishonour stain the brow 
 Of my young Harry. O that it could be proved 
 That some night-tripping fairy had exchanged 
 In cradle-clothes our children where they lay, 
 And call'd mine Percy, his Plantagenet! 
 Then would I have his Harry, and he mine. 
 But let him from my thoughts. What think you, coz, 
 Of this young Percy's pride? the prisoners, 
 Which he in this adventure hath surprised, 
 To his own use he keeps; and sends me word, 
 I shall have none but Mordake Earl of Fife. 
 WESTMORELAND  This is his uncle's teaching; this is Worcester, 
 Malevolent to you in all aspects; 
 Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up 
 The crest of youth against your dignity. 
 KING HENRY IV  But I have sent for him to answer this; 
 And for this cause awhile we must neglect 
 Our holy purpose to Jerusalem. 
 Cousin, on Wednesday next our council we 
 Will hold at Windsor; so inform the lords: 
 But come yourself with speed to us again; 
 For more is to be said and to be done 
 Than out of anger can be uttered. 
 WESTMORELAND  I will, my liege. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry IV, part 1  | Act 1, Scene 1 
 Next scene 