SCENE II. Orleans. Within the town. The First part of King Henry the Sixth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 1  | Act 2, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. Orleans. Within the town. 
 Enter TALBOT, BEDFORD, BURGUNDY, a Captain, and others  BEDFORD  The day begins to break, and night is fled, 
 Whose pitchy mantle over-veil'd the earth. 
 Here sound retreat, and cease our hot pursuit. 

 Retreat sounded  TALBOT  Bring forth the body of old Salisbury, 
 And here advance it in the market-place, 
 The middle centre of this cursed town. 
 Now have I paid my vow unto his soul; 
 For every drop of blood was drawn from him, 
 There hath at least five Frenchmen died tonight. 
 And that hereafter ages may behold 
 What ruin happen'd in revenge of him, 
 Within their chiefest temple I'll erect 
 A tomb, wherein his corpse shall be interr'd: 
 Upon the which, that every one may read, 
 Shall be engraved the sack of Orleans, 
 The treacherous manner of his mournful death 
 And what a terror he had been to France. 
 But, lords, in all our bloody massacre, 
 I muse we met not with the Dauphin's grace, 
 His new-come champion, virtuous Joan of Arc, 
 Nor any of his false confederates. 
 BEDFORD  'Tis thought, Lord Talbot, when the fight began, 
 Roused on the sudden from their drowsy beds, 
 They did amongst the troops of armed men 
 Leap o'er the walls for refuge in the field. 
 BURGUNDY  Myself, as far as I could well discern 
 For smoke and dusky vapours of the night, 
 Am sure I scared the Dauphin and his trull, 
 When arm in arm they both came swiftly running, 
 Like to a pair of loving turtle-doves 
 That could not live asunder day or night. 
 After that things are set in order here, 
 We'll follow them with all the power we have. 

 Enter a Messenger  Messenger  All hail, my lords! which of this princely train 
 Call ye the warlike Talbot, for his acts 
 So much applauded through the realm of France? 
 TALBOT  Here is the Talbot: who would speak with him? 
 Messenger  The virtuous lady, Countess of Auvergne, 
 With modesty admiring thy renown, 
 By me entreats, great lord, thou wouldst vouchsafe 
 To visit her poor castle where she lies, 
 That she may boast she hath beheld the man 
 Whose glory fills the world with loud report. 
 BURGUNDY  Is it even so? Nay, then, I see our wars 
 Will turn unto a peaceful comic sport, 
 When ladies crave to be encounter'd with. 
 You may not, my lord, despise her gentle suit. 
 TALBOT  Ne'er trust me then; for when a world of men 
 Could not prevail with all their oratory, 
 Yet hath a woman's kindness over-ruled: 
 And therefore tell her I return great thanks, 
 And in submission will attend on her. 
 Will not your honours bear me company? 
 BEDFORD  No, truly; it is more than manners will: 
 And I have heard it said, unbidden guests 
 Are often welcomest when they are gone. 
 TALBOT  Well then, alone, since there's no remedy, 
 I mean to prove this lady's courtesy. 
 Come hither, captain. 

 Whispers  You perceive my mind? 
 Captain  I do, my lord, and mean accordingly. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 1  | Act 2, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 