SCENE II. A public road near Coventry. The First part of King Henry the Fourth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry IV, part 1  | Act 4, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. A public road near Coventry. 
 Enter FALSTAFF and BARDOLPH  FALSTAFF  Bardolph, get thee before to Coventry; fill me a 
 bottle of sack: our soldiers shall march through; 
 we'll to Sutton Co'fil' tonight. 
 BARDOLPH  Will you give me money, captain? 
 FALSTAFF  Lay out, lay out. 
 BARDOLPH  This bottle makes an angel. 
 FALSTAFF  An if it do, take it for thy labour; and if it make 
 twenty, take them all; I'll answer the coinage. Bid 
 my lieutenant Peto meet me at town's end. 
 BARDOLPH  I will, captain: farewell. 

 Exit  FALSTAFF  If I be not ashamed of my soldiers, I am a soused 
 gurnet. I have misused the king's press damnably. 
 I have got, in exchange of a hundred and fifty 
 soldiers, three hundred and odd pounds. I press me 
 none but good house-holders, yeoman's sons; inquire 
 me out contracted bachelors, such as had been asked 
 twice on the banns; such a commodity of warm slaves, 
 as had as lieve hear the devil as a drum; such as 
 fear the report of a caliver worse than a struck 
 fowl or a hurt wild-duck. I pressed me none but such 
 toasts-and-butter, with hearts in their bellies no 
 bigger than pins' heads, and they have bought out 
 their services; and now my whole charge consists of 
 ancients, corporals, lieutenants, gentlemen of 
 companies, slaves as ragged as Lazarus in the 
 painted cloth, where the glutton's dogs licked his 
 sores; and such as indeed were never soldiers, but 
 discarded unjust serving-men, younger sons to 
 younger brothers, revolted tapsters and ostlers 
 trade-fallen, the cankers of a calm world and a 
 long peace, ten times more dishonourable ragged than 
 an old faced ancient: and such have I, to fill up 
 the rooms of them that have bought out their 
 services, that you would think that I had a hundred 
 and fifty tattered prodigals lately come from 
 swine-keeping, from eating draff and husks. A mad 
 fellow met me on the way and told me I had unloaded 
 all the gibbets and pressed the dead bodies. No eye 
 hath seen such scarecrows. I'll not march through 
 Coventry with them, that's flat: nay, and the 
 villains march wide betwixt the legs, as if they had 
 gyves on; for indeed I had the most of them out of 
 prison. There's but a shirt and a half in all my 
 company; and the half shirt is two napkins tacked 
 together and thrown over the shoulders like an 
 herald's coat without sleeves; and the shirt, to say 
 the truth, stolen from my host at Saint Alban's, or 
 the red-nose innkeeper of Daventry. But that's all 
 one; they'll find linen enough on every hedge. 

 Enter the PRINCE and WESTMORELAND  PRINCE HENRY  How now, blown Jack! how now, quilt! 
 FALSTAFF  What, Hal! how now, mad wag! what a devil dost thou 
 in Warwickshire? My good Lord of Westmoreland, I 
 cry you mercy: I thought your honour had already been 
 at Shrewsbury. 
 WESTMORELAND  Faith, Sir John,'tis more than time that I were 
 there, and you too; but my powers are there already. 
 The king, I can tell you, looks for us all: we must 
 away all night. 
 FALSTAFF  Tut, never fear me: I am as vigilant as a cat to 
 steal cream. 
 PRINCE HENRY  I think, to steal cream indeed, for thy theft hath 
 already made thee butter. But tell me, Jack, whose 
 fellows are these that come after? 
 FALSTAFF  Mine, Hal, mine. 
 PRINCE HENRY  I did never see such pitiful rascals. 
 FALSTAFF  Tut, tut; good enough to toss; food for powder, food 
 for powder; they'll fill a pit as well as better: 
 tush, man, mortal men, mortal men. 
 WESTMORELAND  Ay, but, Sir John, methinks they are exceeding poor 
 and bare, too beggarly. 
 FALSTAFF  'Faith, for their poverty, I know not where they had 
 that; and for their bareness, I am sure they never 
 learned that of me. 
 PRINCE HENRY  No I'll be sworn; unless you call three fingers on 
 the ribs bare. But, sirrah, make haste: Percy is 
 already in the field. 
 FALSTAFF  What, is the king encamped? 
 WESTMORELAND  He is, Sir John: I fear we shall stay too long. 
 FALSTAFF  Well, 
 To the latter end of a fray and the beginning of a feast 
 Fits a dull fighter and a keen guest. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry IV, part 1  | Act 4, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 