SCENE II. GLOUCESTER'S house. The Second part of King Henry the Sixth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 2  | Act 1, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. GLOUCESTER'S house. 
 Enter GLOUCESTER and his DUCHESS  DUCHESS  Why droops my lord, like over-ripen'd corn, 
 Hanging the head at Ceres' plenteous load? 
 Why doth the great Duke Humphrey knit his brows, 
 As frowning at the favours of the world? 
 Why are thine eyes fixed to the sullen earth, 
 Gazing on that which seems to dim thy sight? 
 What seest thou there? King Henry's diadem, 
 Enchased with all the honours of the world? 
 If so, gaze on, and grovel on thy face, 
 Until thy head be circled with the same. 
 Put forth thy hand, reach at the glorious gold. 
 What, is't too short? I'll lengthen it with mine: 
 And, having both together heaved it up, 
 We'll both together lift our heads to heaven, 
 And never more abase our sight so low 
 As to vouchsafe one glance unto the ground. 
 GLOUCESTER  O Nell, sweet Nell, if thou dost love thy lord, 
 Banish the canker of ambitious thoughts. 
 And may that thought, when I imagine ill 
 Against my king and nephew, virtuous Henry, 
 Be my last breathing in this mortal world! 
 My troublous dream this night doth make me sad. 
 DUCHESS  What dream'd my lord? tell me, and I'll requite it 
 With sweet rehearsal of my morning's dream. 
 GLOUCESTER  Methought this staff, mine office-badge in court, 
 Was broke in twain; by whom I have forgot, 
 But, as I think, it was by the cardinal; 
 And on the pieces of the broken wand 
 Were placed the heads of Edmund Duke of Somerset, 
 And William de la Pole, first duke of Suffolk. 
 This was my dream: what it doth bode, God knows. 
 DUCHESS  Tut, this was nothing but an argument 
 That he that breaks a stick of Gloucester's grove 
 Shall lose his head for his presumption. 
 But list to me, my Humphrey, my sweet duke: 
 Methought I sat in seat of majesty 
 In the cathedral church of Westminster, 
 And in that chair where kings and queens are crown'd; 
 Where Henry and dame Margaret kneel'd to me 
 And on my head did set the diadem. 
 GLOUCESTER  Nay, Eleanor, then must I chide outright: 
 Presumptuous dame, ill-nurtured Eleanor, 
 Art thou not second woman in the realm, 
 And the protector's wife, beloved of him? 
 Hast thou not worldly pleasure at command, 
 Above the reach or compass of thy thought? 
 And wilt thou still be hammering treachery, 
 To tumble down thy husband and thyself 
 From top of honour to disgrace's feet? 
 Away from me, and let me hear no more! 
 DUCHESS  What, what, my lord! are you so choleric 
 With Eleanor, for telling but her dream? 
 Next time I'll keep my dreams unto myself, 
 And not be cheque'd. 
 GLOUCESTER  Nay, be not angry; I am pleased again. 

 Enter Messenger  Messenger  My lord protector, 'tis his highness' pleasure 
 You do prepare to ride unto Saint Alban's, 
 Where as the king and queen do mean to hawk. 
 GLOUCESTER  I go. Come, Nell, thou wilt ride with us? 
 DUCHESS  Yes, my good lord, I'll follow presently. 

 Exeunt GLOUCESTER and Messenger  Follow I must; I cannot go before, 
 While Gloucester bears this base and humble mind. 
 Were I a man, a duke, and next of blood, 
 I would remove these tedious stumbling-blocks 
 And smooth my way upon their headless necks; 
 And, being a woman, I will not be slack 
 To play my part in Fortune's pageant. 
 Where are you there? Sir John! nay, fear not, man, 
 We are alone; here's none but thee and I. 

 Enter HUME  HUME  Jesus preserve your royal majesty! 
 DUCHESS  What say'st thou? majesty! I am but grace. 
 HUME  But, by the grace of God, and Hume's advice, 
 Your grace's title shall be multiplied. 
 DUCHESS  What say'st thou, man? hast thou as yet conferr'd 
 With Margery Jourdain, the cunning witch, 
 With Roger Bolingbroke, the conjurer? 
 And will they undertake to do me good? 
 HUME  This they have promised, to show your highness 
 A spirit raised from depth of under-ground, 
 That shall make answer to such questions 
 As by your grace shall be propounded him. 
 DUCHESS  It is enough; I'll think upon the questions: 
 When from St. Alban's we do make return, 
 We'll see these things effected to the full. 
 Here, Hume, take this reward; make merry, man, 
 With thy confederates in this weighty cause. 

 Exit  HUME  Hume must make merry with the duchess' gold; 
 Marry, and shall. But how now, Sir John Hume! 
 Seal up your lips, and give no words but mum: 
 The business asketh silent secrecy. 
 Dame Eleanor gives gold to bring the witch: 
 Gold cannot come amiss, were she a devil. 
 Yet have I gold flies from another coast; 
 I dare not say, from the rich cardinal 
 And from the great and new-made Duke of Suffolk, 
 Yet I do find it so; for to be plain, 
 They, knowing Dame Eleanor's aspiring humour, 
 Have hired me to undermine the duchess 
 And buz these conjurations in her brain. 
 They say 'A crafty knave does need no broker;' 
 Yet am I Suffolk and the cardinal's broker. 
 Hume, if you take not heed, you shall go near 
 To call them both a pair of crafty knaves. 
 Well, so it stands; and thus, I fear, at last 
 Hume's knavery will be the duchess' wreck, 
 And her attainture will be Humphrey's fall: 
 Sort how it will, I shall have gold for all. 

 Exit  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 2  | Act 1, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 