SCENE IX. Kenilworth Castle. The Second part of King Henry the Sixth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 2  | Act 4, Scene 9 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE IX. Kenilworth Castle. 
 Sound Trumpets. Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET, and SOMERSET, on the terrace  KING HENRY VI  Was ever king that joy'd an earthly throne, 
 And could command no more content than I? 
 No sooner was I crept out of my cradle 
 But I was made a king, at nine months old. 
 Was never subject long'd to be a king 
 As I do long and wish to be a subject. 

 Enter BUCKINGHAM and CLIFFORD  BUCKINGHAM  Health and glad tidings to your majesty! 
 KING HENRY VI  Why, Buckingham, is the traitor Cade surprised? 
 Or is he but retired to make him strong? 

 Enter below, multitudes, with halters about their necks  CLIFFORD  He is fled, my lord, and all his powers do yield; 
 And humbly thus, with halters on their necks, 
 Expect your highness' doom of life or death. 
 KING HENRY VI  Then, heaven, set ope thy everlasting gates, 
 To entertain my vows of thanks and praise! 
 Soldiers, this day have you redeemed your lives, 
 And show'd how well you love your prince and country: 
 Continue still in this so good a mind, 
 And Henry, though he be infortunate, 
 Assure yourselves, will never be unkind: 
 And so, with thanks and pardon to you all, 
 I do dismiss you to your several countries. 
 ALL  God save the king! God save the king! 

 Enter a Messenger  Messenger  Please it your grace to be advertised 
 The Duke of York is newly come from Ireland, 
 And with a puissant and a mighty power 
 Of gallowglasses and stout kerns 
 Is marching hitherward in proud array, 
 And still proclaimeth, as he comes along, 
 His arms are only to remove from thee 
 The Duke of Somerset, whom he terms traitor. 
 KING HENRY VI  Thus stands my state, 'twixt Cade and York distress'd. 
 Like to a ship that, having 'scaped a tempest, 
 Is straightway calm'd and boarded with a pirate: 
 But now is Cade driven back, his men dispersed; 
 And now is York in arms to second him. 
 I pray thee, Buckingham, go and meet him, 
 And ask him what's the reason of these arms. 
 Tell him I'll send Duke Edmund to the Tower; 
 And, Somerset, we'll commit thee thither, 
 Until his army be dismiss'd from him. 
 SOMERSET  My lord, 
 I'll yield myself to prison willingly, 
 Or unto death, to do my country good. 
 KING HENRY VI  In any case, be not too rough in terms; 
 For he is fierce and cannot brook hard language. 
 BUCKINGHAM  I will, my lord; and doubt not so to deal 
 As all things shall redound unto your good. 
 KING HENRY VI  Come, wife, let's in, and learn to govern better; 
 For yet may England curse my wretched reign. 

 Flourish. Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 2  | Act 4, Scene 9 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 