3 KING HENRY VI, Act 5 Scene 7 The Third part of King Henry the Sixth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 3  | Act 5, Scene 7 
 Previous scene  SCENE VII. London. The palace. 
 Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV, QUEEN ELIZABETH,	CLARENCE, GLOUCESTER, HASTINGS, a Nurse with the	young Prince, and Attendants 
 KING EDWARD IV  Once  more  we sit in England's royal throne, 
 Re-purchased  with the blood of enemies. 
 What  valiant foemen, like to autumn's corn, 
 Have  we  mow  'd down, in tops of all their  pride  ! 
 Three  Dukes of Somerset, threefold renown'd 
 For  hardy and undoubted champions; 
 Two  Cliffords, as the father and the son, 
 And  two Northumberlands; two braver men 
 Ne'er  spurr'd their coursers at the trumpet's sound; 
 With  them, the two  brave  bears, Warwick and Montague, 
 That  in their chains fetter'd the kingly lion 
 And  made the forest tremble when they roar'd. 
 Thus  have we swept suspicion from our seat 
 And  made our footstool of security. 
 Come  hither, Bess, and let me kiss my boy. 
 Young  Ned, for thee, thine uncles and myself 
 Have  in our armours  watch  'd the winter's night, 
 Went  all afoot in summer's scalding  heat  , 
 That  thou mightst repossess the crown in peace; 
 And  of our labours thou shalt reap the gain. 


 GLOUCESTER  [Aside]  I'll blast his harvest, if your head were laid; 
 For  yet I am not look'd on in the world. 
 This  shoulder was ordain'd so  thick  to heave; 
 And  heave it shall some weight, or break my back: 
 Work  thou the way,--and thou shalt execute. 


 KING EDWARD IV  Clarence  and Gloucester, love my lovely queen; 
 And  kiss your princely  nephew  , brothers both. 


 CLARENCE  The  duty that I  owe  unto your majesty 
 I  seal  upon the lips of this sweet babe. 


 QUEEN ELIZABETH  Thanks, noble Clarence; worthy brother, thanks. 

 GLOUCESTER  And, that I love the tree from whence thou sprang'st, 
 Witness  the loving kiss I give the fruit. 
 [Aside]  To say the truth, so Judas kiss'd his master, 
 And  cried 'all hail!' when as he meant all harm. 


 KING EDWARD IV  Now  am I  seated  as my soul delights, 
 Having  my  country  's peace and brothers' loves. 


 CLARENCE  What  will your grace have done with Margaret? 
 Reignier, her father, to the king of France 
 Hath  pawn'd the Sicils and Jerusalem, 
 And  hither have they sent it for her ransom. 


 KING EDWARD IV  Away  with her, and  waft  her  hence  to France. 
 And  now what rests but that we spend the time 
 With  stately triumphs, mirthful comic shows, 
 Such  as befits the pleasure of the court? 
 Sound  drums and trumpets! farewell sour annoy! 
 For  here, I hope, begins our lasting joy. 

 Exeunt 