SCENE VI. London. The Tower. The Third part of King Henry the Sixth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 3  | Act 4, Scene 6 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE VI. London. The Tower. 
 Flourish. Enter KING HENRY VI, CLARENCE, WARWICK,  SOMERSET, HENRY OF RICHMOND, OXFORD, MONTAGUE, and Lieutenant of the Tower  KING HENRY VI  Master lieutenant, now that God and friends 
 Have shaken Edward from the regal seat, 
 And turn'd my captive state to liberty, 
 My fear to hope, my sorrows unto joys, 
 At our enlargement what are thy due fees? 
 Lieutenant  Subjects may challenge nothing of their sovereigns; 
 But if an humble prayer may prevail, 
 I then crave pardon of your majesty. 
 KING HENRY VI  For what, lieutenant? for well using me? 
 Nay, be thou sure I'll well requite thy kindness, 
 For that it made my imprisonment a pleasure; 
 Ay, such a pleasure as incaged birds 
 Conceive when after many moody thoughts 
 At last by notes of household harmony 
 They quite forget their loss of liberty. 
 But, Warwick, after God, thou set'st me free, 
 And chiefly therefore I thank God and thee; 
 He was the author, thou the instrument. 
 Therefore, that I may conquer fortune's spite 
 By living low, where fortune cannot hurt me, 
 And that the people of this blessed land 
 May not be punish'd with my thwarting stars, 
 Warwick, although my head still wear the crown, 
 I here resign my government to thee, 
 For thou art fortunate in all thy deeds. 
 WARWICK  Your grace hath still been famed for virtuous; 
 And now may seem as wise as virtuous, 
 By spying and avoiding fortune's malice, 
 For few men rightly temper with the stars: 
 Yet in this one thing let me blame your grace, 
 For choosing me when Clarence is in place. 
 CLARENCE  No, Warwick, thou art worthy of the sway, 
 To whom the heavens in thy nativity 
 Adjudged an olive branch and laurel crown, 
 As likely to be blest in peace and war; 
 And therefore I yield thee my free consent. 
 WARWICK  And I choose Clarence only for protector. 
 KING HENRY VI  Warwick and Clarence give me both your hands: 
 Now join your hands, and with your hands your hearts, 
 That no dissension hinder government: 
 I make you both protectors of this land, 
 While I myself will lead a private life 
 And in devotion spend my latter days, 
 To sin's rebuke and my Creator's praise. 
 WARWICK  What answers Clarence to his sovereign's will? 
 CLARENCE  That he consents, if Warwick yield consent; 
 For on thy fortune I repose myself. 
 WARWICK  Why, then, though loath, yet must I be content: 
 We'll yoke together, like a double shadow 
 To Henry's body, and supply his place; 
 I mean, in bearing weight of government, 
 While he enjoys the honour and his ease. 
 And, Clarence, now then it is more than needful 
 Forthwith that Edward be pronounced a traitor, 
 And all his lands and goods be confiscate. 
 CLARENCE  What else? and that succession be determined. 
 WARWICK  Ay, therein Clarence shall not want his part. 
 KING HENRY VI  But, with the first of all your chief affairs, 
 Let me entreat, for I command no more, 
 That Margaret your queen and my son Edward 
 Be sent for, to return from France with speed; 
 For, till I see them here, by doubtful fear 
 My joy of liberty is half eclipsed. 
 CLARENCE  It shall be done, my sovereign, with all speed. 
 KING HENRY VI  My Lord of Somerset, what youth is that, 
 Of whom you seem to have so tender care? 
 SOMERSET  My liege, it is young Henry, earl of Richmond. 
 KING HENRY VI  Come hither, England's hope. 

 Lays his hand on his head  If secret powers 
 Suggest but truth to my divining thoughts, 
 This pretty lad will prove our country's bliss. 
 His looks are full of peaceful majesty, 
 His head by nature framed to wear a crown, 
 His hand to wield a sceptre, and himself 
 Likely in time to bless a regal throne. 
 Make much of him, my lords, for this is he 
 Must help you more than you are hurt by me. 

 Enter a Post  WARWICK  What news, my friend? 
 Post  That Edward is escaped from your brother, 
 And fled, as he hears since, to Burgundy. 
 WARWICK  Unsavoury news! but how made he escape? 
 Post  He was convey'd by Richard Duke of Gloucester 
 And the Lord Hastings, who attended him 
 In secret ambush on the forest side 
 And from the bishop's huntsmen rescued him; 
 For hunting was his daily exercise. 
 WARWICK  My brother was too careless of his charge. 
 But let us hence, my sovereign, to provide 
 A salve for any sore that may betide. 

 Exeunt all but SOMERSET, HENRY OF RICHMOND, and OXFORD  SOMERSET  My lord, I like not of this flight of Edward's; 
 For doubtless Burgundy will yield him help, 
 And we shall have more wars before 't be long. 
 As Henry's late presaging prophecy 
 Did glad my heart with hope of this young Richmond, 
 So doth my heart misgive me, in these conflicts 
 What may befall him, to his harm and ours: 
 Therefore, Lord Oxford, to prevent the worst, 
 Forthwith we'll send him hence to Brittany, 
 Till storms be past of civil enmity. 
 OXFORD  Ay, for if Edward repossess the crown, 
 'Tis like that Richmond with the rest shall down. 
 SOMERSET  It shall be so; he shall to Brittany. 
 Come, therefore, let's about it speedily. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 3  | Act 4, Scene 6 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 