SCENE III. France. KING LEWIS XI's palace. The Third part of King Henry the Sixth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 3  | Act 3, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. France. KING LEWIS XI's palace. 
 Flourish. Enter KING LEWIS XI, his sister BONA,  his Admiral, called BOURBON, PRINCE EDWARD, QUEEN  MARGARET, and OXFORD. KING LEWIS XI sits, and riseth up again  KING LEWIS XI  Fair Queen of England, worthy Margaret, 
 Sit down with us: it ill befits thy state 
 And birth, that thou shouldst stand while Lewis doth sit. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  No, mighty King of France: now Margaret 
 Must strike her sail and learn awhile to serve 
 Where kings command. I was, I must confess, 
 Great Albion's queen in former golden days: 
 But now mischance hath trod my title down, 
 And with dishonour laid me on the ground; 
 Where I must take like seat unto my fortune, 
 And to my humble seat conform myself. 
 KING LEWIS XI  Why, say, fair queen, whence springs this deep despair? 
 QUEEN MARGARET  From such a cause as fills mine eyes with tears 
 And stops my tongue, while heart is drown'd in cares. 
 KING LEWIS XI  Whate'er it be, be thou still like thyself, 
 And sit thee by our side: 

 Seats her by him  Yield not thy neck 
 To fortune's yoke, but let thy dauntless mind 
 Still ride in triumph over all mischance. 
 Be plain, Queen Margaret, and tell thy grief; 
 It shall be eased, if France can yield relief. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Those gracious words revive my drooping thoughts 
 And give my tongue-tied sorrows leave to speak. 
 Now, therefore, be it known to noble Lewis, 
 That Henry, sole possessor of my love, 
 Is of a king become a banish'd man, 
 And forced to live in Scotland a forlorn; 
 While proud ambitious Edward Duke of York 
 Usurps the regal title and the seat 
 Of England's true-anointed lawful king. 
 This is the cause that I, poor Margaret, 
 With this my son, Prince Edward, Henry's heir, 
 Am come to crave thy just and lawful aid; 
 And if thou fail us, all our hope is done: 
 Scotland hath will to help, but cannot help; 
 Our people and our peers are both misled, 
 Our treasures seized, our soldiers put to flight, 
 And, as thou seest, ourselves in heavy plight. 
 KING LEWIS XI  Renowned queen, with patience calm the storm, 
 While we bethink a means to break it off. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  The more we stay, the stronger grows our foe. 
 KING LEWIS XI  The more I stay, the more I'll succor thee. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  O, but impatience waiteth on true sorrow. 
 And see where comes the breeder of my sorrow! 

 Enter WARWICK  KING LEWIS XI  What's he approacheth boldly to our presence? 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Our Earl of Warwick, Edward's greatest friend. 
 KING LEWIS XI  Welcome, brave Warwick! What brings thee to France? 

 He descends. She ariseth  QUEEN MARGARET  Ay, now begins a second storm to rise; 
 For this is he that moves both wind and tide. 
 WARWICK  From worthy Edward, King of Albion, 
 My lord and sovereign, and thy vowed friend, 
 I come, in kindness and unfeigned love, 
 First, to do greetings to thy royal person; 
 And then to crave a league of amity; 
 And lastly, to confirm that amity 
 With a nuptial knot, if thou vouchsafe to grant 
 That virtuous Lady Bona, thy fair sister, 
 To England's king in lawful marriage. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  [Aside]  If that go forward, Henry's hope is done. 
 WARWICK  [To BONA]  And, gracious madam, in our king's behalf, 
 I am commanded, with your leave and favour, 
 Humbly to kiss your hand, and with my tongue 
 To tell the passion of my sovereign's heart; 
 Where fame, late entering at his heedful ears, 
 Hath placed thy beauty's image and thy virtue. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  King Lewis and Lady Bona, hear me speak, 
 Before you answer Warwick. His demand 
 Springs not from Edward's well-meant honest love, 
 But from deceit bred by necessity; 
 For how can tyrants safely govern home, 
 Unless abroad they purchase great alliance? 
 To prove him tyrant this reason may suffice, 
 That Henry liveth still: but were he dead, 
 Yet here Prince Edward stands, King Henry's son. 
 Look, therefore, Lewis, that by this league and marriage 
 Thou draw not on thy danger and dishonour; 
 For though usurpers sway the rule awhile, 
 Yet heavens are just, and time suppresseth wrongs. 
 WARWICK  Injurious Margaret! 
 PRINCE EDWARD  And why not queen? 
 WARWICK  Because thy father Henry did usurp; 
 And thou no more are prince than she is queen. 
 OXFORD  Then Warwick disannuls great John of Gaunt, 
 Which did subdue the greatest part of Spain; 
 And, after John of Gaunt, Henry the Fourth, 
 Whose wisdom was a mirror to the wisest; 
 And, after that wise prince, Henry the Fifth, 
 Who by his prowess conquered all France: 
 From these our Henry lineally descends. 
 WARWICK  Oxford, how haps it, in this smooth discourse, 
 You told not how Henry the Sixth hath lost 
 All that which Henry Fifth had gotten? 
 Methinks these peers of France should smile at that. 
 But for the rest, you tell a pedigree 
 Of threescore and two years; a silly time 
 To make prescription for a kingdom's worth. 
 OXFORD  Why, Warwick, canst thou speak against thy liege, 
 Whom thou obeyed'st thirty and six years, 
 And not bewray thy treason with a blush? 
 WARWICK  Can Oxford, that did ever fence the right, 
 Now buckler falsehood with a pedigree? 
 For shame! leave Henry, and call Edward king. 
 OXFORD  Call him my king by whose injurious doom 
 My elder brother, the Lord Aubrey Vere, 
 Was done to death? and more than so, my father, 
 Even in the downfall of his mellow'd years, 
 When nature brought him to the door of death? 
 No, Warwick, no; while life upholds this arm, 
 This arm upholds the house of Lancaster. 
 WARWICK  And I the house of York. 
 KING LEWIS XI  Queen Margaret, Prince Edward, and Oxford, 
 Vouchsafe, at our request, to stand aside, 
 While I use further conference with Warwick. 

 They stand aloof  QUEEN MARGARET  Heavens grant that Warwick's words bewitch him not! 
 KING LEWIS XI  Now Warwick, tell me, even upon thy conscience, 
 Is Edward your true king? for I were loath 
 To link with him that were not lawful chosen. 
 WARWICK  Thereon I pawn my credit and mine honour. 
 KING LEWIS XI  But is he gracious in the people's eye? 
 WARWICK  The more that Henry was unfortunate. 
 KING LEWIS XI  Then further, all dissembling set aside, 
 Tell me for truth the measure of his love 
 Unto our sister Bona. 
 WARWICK  Such it seems 
 As may beseem a monarch like himself. 
 Myself have often heard him say and swear 
 That this his love was an eternal plant, 
 Whereof the root was fix'd in virtue's ground, 
 The leaves and fruit maintain'd with beauty's sun, 
 Exempt from envy, but not from disdain, 
 Unless the Lady Bona quit his pain. 
 KING LEWIS XI  Now, sister, let us hear your firm resolve. 
 BONA  Your grant, or your denial, shall be mine: 

 To WARWICK  Yet I confess that often ere this day, 
 When I have heard your king's desert recounted, 
 Mine ear hath tempted judgment to desire. 
 KING LEWIS XI  Then, Warwick, thus: our sister shall be Edward's; 
 And now forthwith shall articles be drawn 
 Touching the jointure that your king must make, 
 Which with her dowry shall be counterpoised. 
 Draw near, Queen Margaret, and be a witness 
 That Bona shall be wife to the English king. 
 PRINCE EDWARD  To Edward, but not to the English king. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Deceitful Warwick! it was thy device 
 By this alliance to make void my suit: 
 Before thy coming Lewis was Henry's friend. 
 KING LEWIS XI  And still is friend to him and Margaret: 
 But if your title to the crown be weak, 
 As may appear by Edward's good success, 
 Then 'tis but reason that I be released 
 From giving aid which late I promised. 
 Yet shall you have all kindness at my hand 
 That your estate requires and mine can yield. 
 WARWICK  Henry now lives in Scotland at his ease, 
 Where having nothing, nothing can he lose. 
 And as for you yourself, our quondam queen, 
 You have a father able to maintain you; 
 And better 'twere you troubled him than France. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Peace, impudent and shameless Warwick, peace, 
 Proud setter up and puller down of kings! 
 I will not hence, till, with my talk and tears, 
 Both full of truth, I make King Lewis behold 
 Thy sly conveyance and thy lord's false love; 
 For both of you are birds of selfsame feather. 

 Post blows a horn within  KING LEWIS XI  Warwick, this is some post to us or thee. 

 Enter a Post  Post  [To WARWICK]  My lord ambassador, these letters are for you, 
 Sent from your brother, Marquess Montague: 

 To KING LEWIS XI  These from our king unto your majesty: 

 To QUEEN MARGARET  And, madam, these for you; from whom I know not. 

 They all read their letters  OXFORD  I like it well that our fair queen and mistress 
 Smiles at her news, while Warwick frowns at his. 
 PRINCE EDWARD  Nay, mark how Lewis stamps, as he were nettled: 
 I hope all's for the best. 
 KING LEWIS XI  Warwick, what are thy news? and yours, fair queen? 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Mine, such as fill my heart with unhoped joys. 
 WARWICK  Mine, full of sorrow and heart's discontent. 
 KING LEWIS XI  What! has your king married the Lady Grey! 
 And now, to soothe your forgery and his, 
 Sends me a paper to persuade me patience? 
 Is this the alliance that he seeks with France? 
 Dare he presume to scorn us in this manner? 
 QUEEN MARGARET  I told your majesty as much before: 
 This proveth Edward's love and Warwick's honesty. 
 WARWICK  King Lewis, I here protest, in sight of heaven, 
 And by the hope I have of heavenly bliss, 
 That I am clear from this misdeed of Edward's, 
 No more my king, for he dishonours me, 
 But most himself, if he could see his shame. 
 Did I forget that by the house of York 
 My father came untimely to his death? 
 Did I let pass the abuse done to my niece? 
 Did I impale him with the regal crown? 
 Did I put Henry from his native right? 
 And am I guerdon'd at the last with shame? 
 Shame on himself! for my desert is honour: 
 And to repair my honour lost for him, 
 I here renounce him and return to Henry. 
 My noble queen, let former grudges pass, 
 And henceforth I am thy true servitor: 
 I will revenge his wrong to Lady Bona, 
 And replant Henry in his former state. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Warwick, these words have turn'd my hate to love; 
 And I forgive and quite forget old faults, 
 And joy that thou becomest King Henry's friend. 
 WARWICK  So much his friend, ay, his unfeigned friend, 
 That, if King Lewis vouchsafe to furnish us 
 With some few bands of chosen soldiers, 
 I'll undertake to land them on our coast 
 And force the tyrant from his seat by war. 
 'Tis not his new-made bride shall succor him: 
 And as for Clarence, as my letters tell me, 
 He's very likely now to fall from him, 
 For matching more for wanton lust than honour, 
 Or than for strength and safety of our country. 
 BONA  Dear brother, how shall Bona be revenged 
 But by thy help to this distressed queen? 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Renowned prince, how shall poor Henry live, 
 Unless thou rescue him from foul despair? 
 BONA  My quarrel and this English queen's are one. 
 WARWICK  And mine, fair lady Bona, joins with yours. 
 KING LEWIS XI  And mine with hers, and thine, and Margaret's. 
 Therefore at last I firmly am resolved 
 You shall have aid. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Let me give humble thanks for all at once. 
 KING LEWIS XI  Then, England's messenger, return in post, 
 And tell false Edward, thy supposed king, 
 That Lewis of France is sending over masquers 
 To revel it with him and his new bride: 
 Thou seest what's past, go fear thy king withal. 
 BONA  Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly, 
 I'll wear the willow garland for his sake. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Tell him, my mourning weeds are laid aside, 
 And I am ready to put armour on. 
 WARWICK  Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong, 
 And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long. 
 There's thy reward: be gone. 

 Exit Post  KING LEWIS XI  But, Warwick, 
 Thou and Oxford, with five thousand men, 
 Shall cross the seas, and bid false Edward battle; 
 And, as occasion serves, this noble queen 
 And prince shall follow with a fresh supply. 
 Yet, ere thou go, but answer me one doubt, 
 What pledge have we of thy firm loyalty? 
 WARWICK  This shall assure my constant loyalty, 
 That if our queen and this young prince agree, 
 I'll join mine eldest daughter and my joy 
 To him forthwith in holy wedlock bands. 
 QUEEN MARGARET  Yes, I agree, and thank you for your motion. 
 Son Edward, she is fair and virtuous, 
 Therefore delay not, give thy hand to Warwick; 
 And, with thy hand, thy faith irrevocable, 
 That only Warwick's daughter shall be thine. 
 PRINCE EDWARD  Yes, I accept her, for she well deserves it; 
 And here, to pledge my vow, I give my hand. 

 He gives his hand to WARWICK  KING LEWIS XI  Why stay we now? These soldiers shall be levied, 
 And thou, Lord Bourbon, our high admiral, 
 Shalt waft them over with our royal fleet. 
 I long till Edward fall by war's mischance, 
 For mocking marriage with a dame of France. 

 Exeunt all but WARWICK  WARWICK  I came from Edward as ambassador, 
 But I return his sworn and mortal foe: 
 Matter of marriage was the charge he gave me, 
 But dreadful war shall answer his demand. 
 Had he none else to make a stale but me? 
 Then none but I shall turn his jest to sorrow. 
 I was the chief that raised him to the crown, 
 And I'll be chief to bring him down again: 
 Not that I pity Henry's misery, 
 But seek revenge on Edward's mockery. 

 Exit  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VI, part 3  | Act 3, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 