SCENE I. Marseilles. A street. All's Well That Ends Well  Shakespeare homepage  |  All's Well That Ends Well  | Act 5, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. Marseilles. A street. 
 Enter HELENA, Widow, and DIANA, with two Attendants  HELENA  But this exceeding posting day and night 
 Must wear your spirits low; we cannot help it: 
 But since you have made the days and nights as one, 
 To wear your gentle limbs in my affairs, 
 Be bold you do so grow in my requital 
 As nothing can unroot you. In happy time; 

 Enter a Gentleman  This man may help me to his majesty's ear, 
 If he would spend his power. God save you, sir. 
 Gentleman  And you. 
 HELENA  Sir, I have seen you in the court of France. 
 Gentleman  I have been sometimes there. 
 HELENA  I do presume, sir, that you are not fallen 
 From the report that goes upon your goodness; 
 An therefore, goaded with most sharp occasions, 
 Which lay nice manners by, I put you to 
 The use of your own virtues, for the which 
 I shall continue thankful. 
 Gentleman  What's your will? 
 HELENA  That it will please you 
 To give this poor petition to the king, 
 And aid me with that store of power you have 
 To come into his presence. 
 Gentleman  The king's not here. 
 HELENA  Not here, sir! 
 Gentleman  Not, indeed: 
 He hence removed last night and with more haste 
 Than is his use. 
 Widow  Lord, how we lose our pains! 
 HELENA  ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL yet, 
 Though time seem so adverse and means unfit. 
 I do beseech you, whither is he gone? 
 Gentleman  Marry, as I take it, to Rousillon; 
 Whither I am going. 
 HELENA  I do beseech you, sir, 
 Since you are like to see the king before me, 
 Commend the paper to his gracious hand, 
 Which I presume shall render you no blame 
 But rather make you thank your pains for it. 
 I will come after you with what good speed 
 Our means will make us means. 
 Gentleman  This I'll do for you. 
 HELENA  And you shall find yourself to be well thank'd, 
 Whate'er falls more. We must to horse again. 
 Go, go, provide. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  All's Well That Ends Well  | Act 5, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 