SCENE V. Florence. Without the walls. A tucket afar off. All's Well That Ends Well  Shakespeare homepage  |  All's Well That Ends Well  | Act 3, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE V. Florence. Without the walls. A tucket afar off. 
 Enter an old Widow of Florence, DIANA, VIOLENTA, and MARIANA, with other Citizens  Widow  Nay, come; for if they do approach the city, we 
 shall lose all the sight. 
 DIANA  They say the French count has done most honourable service. 
 Widow  It is reported that he has taken their greatest 
 commander; and that with his own hand he slew the 
 duke's brother. 

 Tucket  We have lost our labour; they are gone a contrary 
 way: hark! you may know by their trumpets. 
 MARIANA  Come, let's return again, and suffice ourselves with 
 the report of it. Well, Diana, take heed of this 
 French earl: the honour of a maid is her name; and 
 no legacy is so rich as honesty. 
 Widow  I have told my neighbour how you have been solicited 
 by a gentleman his companion. 
 MARIANA  I know that knave; hang him! one Parolles: a 
 filthy officer he is in those suggestions for the 
 young earl. Beware of them, Diana; their promises, 
 enticements, oaths, tokens, and all these engines of 
 lust, are not the things they go under: many a maid 
 hath been seduced by them; and the misery is, 
 example, that so terrible shows in the wreck of 
 maidenhood, cannot for all that dissuade succession, 
 but that they are limed with the twigs that threaten 
 them. I hope I need not to advise you further; but 
 I hope your own grace will keep you where you are, 
 though there were no further danger known but the 
 modesty which is so lost. 
 DIANA  You shall not need to fear me. 
 Widow  I hope so. 

 Enter HELENA, disguised like a Pilgrim  Look, here comes a pilgrim: I know she will lie at 
 my house; thither they send one another: I'll 
 question her. God save you, pilgrim! whither are you bound? 
 HELENA  To Saint Jaques le Grand. 
 Where do the palmers lodge, I do beseech you? 
 Widow  At the Saint Francis here beside the port. 
 HELENA  Is this the way? 
 Widow  Ay, marry, is't. 

 A march afar  Hark you! they come this way. 
 If you will tarry, holy pilgrim, 
 But till the troops come by, 
 I will conduct you where you shall be lodged; 
 The rather, for I think I know your hostess 
 As ample as myself. 
 HELENA  Is it yourself? 
 Widow  If you shall please so, pilgrim. 
 HELENA  I thank you, and will stay upon your leisure. 
 Widow  You came, I think, from France? 
 HELENA  I did so. 
 Widow  Here you shall see a countryman of yours 
 That has done worthy service. 
 HELENA  His name, I pray you. 
 DIANA  The Count Rousillon: know you such a one? 
 HELENA  But by the ear, that hears most nobly of him: 
 His face I know not. 
 DIANA  Whatsome'er he is, 
 He's bravely taken here. He stole from France, 
 As 'tis reported, for the king had married him 
 Against his liking: think you it is so? 
 HELENA  Ay, surely, mere the truth: I know his lady. 
 DIANA  There is a gentleman that serves the count 
 Reports but coarsely of her. 
 HELENA  What's his name? 
 DIANA  Monsieur Parolles. 
 HELENA  O, I believe with him, 
 In argument of praise, or to the worth 
 Of the great count himself, she is too mean 
 To have her name repeated: all her deserving 
 Is a reserved honesty, and that 
 I have not heard examined. 
 DIANA  Alas, poor lady! 
 'Tis a hard bondage to become the wife 
 Of a detesting lord. 
 Widow  I warrant, good creature, wheresoe'er she is, 
 Her heart weighs sadly: this young maid might do her 
 A shrewd turn, if she pleased. 
 HELENA  How do you mean? 
 May be the amorous count solicits her 
 In the unlawful purpose. 
 Widow  He does indeed; 
 And brokes with all that can in such a suit 
 Corrupt the tender honour of a maid: 
 But she is arm'd for him and keeps her guard 
 In honestest defence. 
 MARIANA  The gods forbid else! 
 Widow  So, now they come: 

 Drum and Colours 
 Enter BERTRAM, PAROLLES, and the whole army  That is Antonio, the duke's eldest son; 
 That, Escalus. 
 HELENA  Which is the Frenchman? 
 DIANA  He; 
 That with the plume: 'tis a most gallant fellow. 
 I would he loved his wife: if he were honester 
 He were much goodlier: is't not a handsome gentleman? 
 HELENA  I like him well. 
 DIANA  'Tis pity he is not honest: yond's that same knave 
 That leads him to these places: were I his lady, 
 I would Poison that vile rascal. 
 HELENA  Which is he? 
 DIANA  That jack-an-apes with scarfs: why is he melancholy? 
 HELENA  Perchance he's hurt i' the battle. 
 PAROLLES  Lose our drum! well. 
 MARIANA  He's shrewdly vexed at something: look, he has spied us. 
 Widow  Marry, hang you! 
 MARIANA  And your courtesy, for a ring-carrier! 

 Exeunt BERTRAM, PAROLLES, and army  Widow  The troop is past. Come, pilgrim, I will bring you 
 Where you shall host: of enjoin'd penitents 
 There's four or five, to great Saint Jaques bound, 
 Already at my house. 
 HELENA  I humbly thank you: 
 Please it this matron and this gentle maid 
 To eat with us to-night, the charge and thanking 
 Shall be for me; and, to requite you further, 
 I will bestow some precepts of this virgin 
 Worthy the note. 
 BOTH  We'll take your offer kindly. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  All's Well That Ends Well  | Act 3, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 