SCENE V. Paris. The KING's palace. All's Well That Ends Well  Shakespeare homepage  |  All's Well That Ends Well  | Act 2, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE V. Paris. The KING's palace. 
 Enter LAFEU and BERTRAM  LAFEU  But I hope your lordship thinks not him a soldier. 
 BERTRAM  Yes, my lord, and of very valiant approof. 
 LAFEU  You have it from his own deliverance. 
 BERTRAM  And by other warranted testimony. 
 LAFEU  Then my dial goes not true: I took this lark for a bunting. 
 BERTRAM  I do assure you, my lord, he is very great in 
 knowledge and accordingly valiant. 
 LAFEU  I have then sinned against his experience and 
 transgressed against his valour; and my state that 
 way is dangerous, since I cannot yet find in my 
 heart to repent. Here he comes: I pray you, make 
 us friends; I will pursue the amity. 

 Enter PAROLLES  PAROLLES  [To BERTRAM]  These things shall be done, sir. 
 LAFEU  Pray you, sir, who's his tailor? 
 PAROLLES  Sir? 
 LAFEU  O, I know him well, I, sir; he, sir, 's a good 
 workman, a very good tailor. 
 BERTRAM  [Aside to PAROLLES]  Is she gone to the king? 
 PAROLLES  She is. 
 BERTRAM  Will she away to-night? 
 PAROLLES  As you'll have her. 
 BERTRAM  I have writ my letters, casketed my treasure, 
 Given order for our horses; and to-night, 
 When I should take possession of the bride, 
 End ere I do begin. 
 LAFEU  A good traveller is something at the latter end of a 
 dinner; but one that lies three thirds and uses a 
 known truth to pass a thousand nothings with, should 
 be once heard and thrice beaten. God save you, captain. 
 BERTRAM  Is there any unkindness between my lord and you, monsieur? 
 PAROLLES  I know not how I have deserved to run into my lord's 
 displeasure. 
 LAFEU  You have made shift to run into 't, boots and spurs 
 and all, like him that leaped into the custard; and 
 out of it you'll run again, rather than suffer 
 question for your residence. 
 BERTRAM  It may be you have mistaken him, my lord. 
 LAFEU  And shall do so ever, though I took him at 's 
 prayers. Fare you well, my lord; and believe this 
 of me, there can be no kernel in this light nut; the 
 soul of this man is his clothes. Trust him not in 
 matter of heavy consequence; I have kept of them 
 tame, and know their natures. Farewell, monsieur: 
 I have spoken better of you than you have or will to 
 deserve at my hand; but we must do good against evil. 

 Exit  PAROLLES  An idle lord. I swear. 
 BERTRAM  I think so. 
 PAROLLES  Why, do you not know him? 
 BERTRAM  Yes, I do know him well, and common speech 
 Gives him a worthy pass. Here comes my clog. 

 Enter HELENA  HELENA  I have, sir, as I was commanded from you, 
 Spoke with the king and have procured his leave 
 For present parting; only he desires 
 Some private speech with you. 
 BERTRAM  I shall obey his will. 
 You must not marvel, Helen, at my course, 
 Which holds not colour with the time, nor does 
 The ministration and required office 
 On my particular. Prepared I was not 
 For such a business; therefore am I found 
 So much unsettled: this drives me to entreat you 
 That presently you take our way for home; 
 And rather muse than ask why I entreat you, 
 For my respects are better than they seem 
 And my appointments have in them a need 
 Greater than shows itself at the first view 
 To you that know them not. This to my mother: 

 Giving a letter  'Twill be two days ere I shall see you, so 
 I leave you to your wisdom. 
 HELENA  Sir, I can nothing say, 
 But that I am your most obedient servant. 
 BERTRAM  Come, come, no more of that. 
 HELENA  And ever shall 
 With true observance seek to eke out that 
 Wherein toward me my homely stars have fail'd 
 To equal my great fortune. 
 BERTRAM  Let that go: 
 My haste is very great: farewell; hie home. 
 HELENA  Pray, sir, your pardon. 
 BERTRAM  Well, what would you say? 
 HELENA  I am not worthy of the wealth I owe, 
 Nor dare I say 'tis mine, and yet it is; 
 But, like a timorous thief, most fain would steal 
 What law does vouch mine own. 
 BERTRAM  What would you have? 
 HELENA  Something; and scarce so much: nothing, indeed. 
 I would not tell you what I would, my lord: 
 Faith yes; 
 Strangers and foes do sunder, and not kiss. 
 BERTRAM  I pray you, stay not, but in haste to horse. 
 HELENA  I shall not break your bidding, good my lord. 
 BERTRAM  Where are my other men, monsieur? Farewell. 

 Exit HELENA  Go thou toward home; where I will never come 
 Whilst I can shake my sword or hear the drum. 
 Away, and for our flight. 
 PAROLLES  Bravely, coragio! 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  All's Well That Ends Well  | Act 2, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 