SCENE IV. Florence. The Widow's house. All's Well That Ends Well  Shakespeare homepage  |  All's Well That Ends Well  | Act 4, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE IV. Florence. The Widow's house. 
 Enter HELENA, Widow, and DIANA  HELENA  That you may well perceive I have not wrong'd you, 
 One of the greatest in the Christian world 
 Shall be my surety; 'fore whose throne 'tis needful, 
 Ere I can perfect mine intents, to kneel: 
 Time was, I did him a desired office, 
 Dear almost as his life; which gratitude 
 Through flinty Tartar's bosom would peep forth, 
 And answer, thanks: I duly am inform'd 
 His grace is at Marseilles; to which place 
 We have convenient convoy. You must know 
 I am supposed dead: the army breaking, 
 My husband hies him home; where, heaven aiding, 
 And by the leave of my good lord the king, 
 We'll be before our welcome. 
 Widow  Gentle madam, 
 You never had a servant to whose trust 
 Your business was more welcome. 
 HELENA  Nor you, mistress, 
 Ever a friend whose thoughts more truly labour 
 To recompense your love: doubt not but heaven 
 Hath brought me up to be your daughter's dower, 
 As it hath fated her to be my motive 
 And helper to a husband. But, O strange men! 
 That can such sweet use make of what they hate, 
 When saucy trusting of the cozen'd thoughts 
 Defiles the pitchy night: so lust doth play 
 With what it loathes for that which is away. 
 But more of this hereafter. You, Diana, 
 Under my poor instructions yet must suffer 
 Something in my behalf. 
 DIANA  Let death and honesty 
 Go with your impositions, I am yours 
 Upon your will to suffer. 
 HELENA  Yet, I pray you: 
 But with the word the time will bring on summer, 
 When briers shall have leaves as well as thorns, 
 And be as sweet as sharp. We must away; 
 Our wagon is prepared, and time revives us: 
 All's well that ends well; still the fine's the crown; 
 Whate'er the course, the end is the renown. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  All's Well That Ends Well  | Act 4, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 