SCENE II. Rousillon. Before the COUNT's palace. All's Well That Ends Well  Shakespeare homepage  |  All's Well That Ends Well  | Act 5, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. Rousillon. Before the COUNT's palace. 
 Enter Clown, and PAROLLES, following  PAROLLES  Good Monsieur Lavache, give my Lord Lafeu this 
 letter: I have ere now, sir, been better known to 
 you, when I have held familiarity with fresher 
 clothes; but I am now, sir, muddied in fortune's 
 mood, and smell somewhat strong of her strong 
 displeasure. 
 Clown  Truly, fortune's displeasure is but sluttish, if it 
 smell so strongly as thou speakest of: I will 
 henceforth eat no fish of fortune's buttering. 
 Prithee, allow the wind. 
 PAROLLES  Nay, you need not to stop your nose, sir; I spake 
 but by a metaphor. 
 Clown  Indeed, sir, if your metaphor stink, I will stop my 
 nose; or against any man's metaphor. Prithee, get 
 thee further. 
 PAROLLES  Pray you, sir, deliver me this paper. 
 Clown  Foh! prithee, stand away: a paper from fortune's 
 close-stool to give to a nobleman! Look, here he 
 comes himself. 

 Enter LAFEU  Here is a purr of fortune's, sir, or of fortune's 
 cat,--but not a musk-cat,--that has fallen into the 
 unclean fishpond of her displeasure, and, as he 
 says, is muddied withal: pray you, sir, use the 
 carp as you may; for he looks like a poor, decayed, 
 ingenious, foolish, rascally knave. I do pity his 
 distress in my similes of comfort and leave him to 
 your lordship. 

 Exit  PAROLLES  My lord, I am a man whom fortune hath cruelly 
 scratched. 
 LAFEU  And what would you have me to do? 'Tis too late to 
 pare her nails now. Wherein have you played the 
 knave with fortune, that she should scratch you, who 
 of herself is a good lady and would not have knaves 
 thrive long under her? There's a quart d'ecu for 
 you: let the justices make you and fortune friends: 
 I am for other business. 
 PAROLLES  I beseech your honour to hear me one single word. 
 LAFEU  You beg a single penny more: come, you shall ha't; 
 save your word. 
 PAROLLES  My name, my good lord, is Parolles. 
 LAFEU  You beg more than 'word,' then. Cox my passion! 
 give me your hand. How does your drum? 
 PAROLLES  O my good lord, you were the first that found me! 
 LAFEU  Was I, in sooth? and I was the first that lost thee. 
 PAROLLES  It lies in you, my lord, to bring me in some grace, 
 for you did bring me out. 
 LAFEU  Out upon thee, knave! dost thou put upon me at once 
 both the office of God and the devil? One brings 
 thee in grace and the other brings thee out. 

 Trumpets sound  The king's coming; I know by his trumpets. Sirrah, 
 inquire further after me; I had talk of you last 
 night: though you are a fool and a knave, you shall 
 eat; go to, follow. 
 PAROLLES  I praise God for you. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  All's Well That Ends Well  | Act 5, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 