SCENE V. Rousillon. The COUNT's palace. All's Well That Ends Well  Shakespeare homepage  |  All's Well That Ends Well  | Act 4, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE V. Rousillon. The COUNT's palace. 
 Enter COUNTESS, LAFEU, and Clown  LAFEU  No, no, no, your son was misled with a snipt-taffeta 
 fellow there, whose villanous saffron would have 
 made all the unbaked and doughy youth of a nation in 
 his colour: your daughter-in-law had been alive at 
 this hour, and your son here at home, more advanced 
 by the king than by that red-tailed humble-bee I speak of. 
 COUNTESS  I would I had not known him; it was the death of the 
 most virtuous gentlewoman that ever nature had 
 praise for creating. If she had partaken of my 
 flesh, and cost me the dearest groans of a mother, I 
 could not have owed her a more rooted love. 
 LAFEU  'Twas a good lady, 'twas a good lady: we may pick a 
 thousand salads ere we light on such another herb. 
 Clown  Indeed, sir, she was the sweet marjoram of the 
 salad, or rather, the herb of grace. 
 LAFEU  They are not herbs, you knave; they are nose-herbs. 
 Clown  I am no great Nebuchadnezzar, sir; I have not much 
 skill in grass. 
 LAFEU  Whether dost thou profess thyself, a knave or a fool? 
 Clown  A fool, sir, at a woman's service, and a knave at a man's. 
 LAFEU  Your distinction? 
 Clown  I would cozen the man of his wife and do his service. 
 LAFEU  So you were a knave at his service, indeed. 
 Clown  And I would give his wife my bauble, sir, to do her service. 
 LAFEU  I will subscribe for thee, thou art both knave and fool. 
 Clown  At your service. 
 LAFEU  No, no, no. 
 Clown  Why, sir, if I cannot serve you, I can serve as 
 great a prince as you are. 
 LAFEU  Who's that? a Frenchman? 
 Clown  Faith, sir, a' has an English name; but his fisnomy 
 is more hotter in France than there. 
 LAFEU  What prince is that? 
 Clown  The black prince, sir; alias, the prince of 
 darkness; alias, the devil. 
 LAFEU  Hold thee, there's my purse: I give thee not this 
 to suggest thee from thy master thou talkest of; 
 serve him still. 
 Clown  I am a woodland fellow, sir, that always loved a 
 great fire; and the master I speak of ever keeps a 
 good fire. But, sure, he is the prince of the 
 world; let his nobility remain in's court. I am for 
 the house with the narrow gate, which I take to be 
 too little for pomp to enter: some that humble 
 themselves may; but the many will be too chill and 
 tender, and they'll be for the flowery way that 
 leads to the broad gate and the great fire. 
 LAFEU  Go thy ways, I begin to be aweary of thee; and I 
 tell thee so before, because I would not fall out 
 with thee. Go thy ways: let my horses be well 
 looked to, without any tricks. 
 Clown  If I put any tricks upon 'em, sir, they shall be 
 jades' tricks; which are their own right by the law of nature. 

 Exit  LAFEU  A shrewd knave and an unhappy. 
 COUNTESS  So he is. My lord that's gone made himself much 
 sport out of him: by his authority he remains here, 
 which he thinks is a patent for his sauciness; and, 
 indeed, he has no pace, but runs where he will. 
 LAFEU  I like him well; 'tis not amiss. And I was about to 
 tell you, since I heard of the good lady's death and 
 that my lord your son was upon his return home, I 
 moved the king my master to speak in the behalf of 
 my daughter; which, in the minority of them both, 
 his majesty, out of a self-gracious remembrance, did 
 first propose: his highness hath promised me to do 
 it: and, to stop up the displeasure he hath 
 conceived against your son, there is no fitter 
 matter. How does your ladyship like it? 
 COUNTESS  With very much content, my lord; and I wish it 
 happily effected. 
 LAFEU  His highness comes post from Marseilles, of as able 
 body as when he numbered thirty: he will be here 
 to-morrow, or I am deceived by him that in such 
 intelligence hath seldom failed. 
 COUNTESS  It rejoices me, that I hope I shall see him ere I 
 die. I have letters that my son will be here 
 to-night: I shall beseech your lordship to remain 
 with me till they meet together. 
 LAFEU  Madam, I was thinking with what manners I might 
 safely be admitted. 
 COUNTESS  You need but plead your honourable privilege. 
 LAFEU  Lady, of that I have made a bold charter; but I 
 thank my God it holds yet. 

 Re-enter Clown  Clown  O madam, yonder's my lord your son with a patch of 
 velvet on's face: whether there be a scar under't 
 or no, the velvet knows; but 'tis a goodly patch of 
 velvet: his left cheek is a cheek of two pile and a 
 half, but his right cheek is worn bare. 
 LAFEU  A scar nobly got, or a noble scar, is a good livery 
 of honour; so belike is that. 
 Clown  But it is your carbonadoed face. 
 LAFEU  Let us go see your son, I pray you: I long to talk 
 with the young noble soldier. 
 Clown  Faith there's a dozen of 'em, with delicate fine 
 hats and most courteous feathers, which bow the head 
 and nod at every man. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  All's Well That Ends Well  | Act 4, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 