SCENE IV. The forest. As You Like It  Shakespeare homepage  |  As You Like It  | Act 5, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  SCENE IV. The forest. 
 Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, JAQUES, ORLANDO, OLIVER, and CELIA  DUKE SENIOR  Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy 
 Can do all this that he hath promised? 
 ORLANDO  I sometimes do believe, and sometimes do not; 
 As those that fear they hope, and know they fear. 

 Enter ROSALIND, SILVIUS, and PHEBE  ROSALIND  Patience once more, whiles our compact is urged: 
 You say, if I bring in your Rosalind, 
 You will bestow her on Orlando here? 
 DUKE SENIOR  That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her. 
 ROSALIND  And you say, you will have her, when I bring her? 
 ORLANDO  That would I, were I of all kingdoms king. 
 ROSALIND  You say, you'll marry me, if I be willing? 
 PHEBE  That will I, should I die the hour after. 
 ROSALIND  But if you do refuse to marry me, 
 You'll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd? 
 PHEBE  So is the bargain. 
 ROSALIND  You say, that you'll have Phebe, if she will? 
 SILVIUS  Though to have her and death were both one thing. 
 ROSALIND  I have promised to make all this matter even. 
 Keep you your word, O duke, to give your daughter; 
 You yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter: 
 Keep your word, Phebe, that you'll marry me, 
 Or else refusing me, to wed this shepherd: 
 Keep your word, Silvius, that you'll marry her. 
 If she refuse me: and from hence I go, 
 To make these doubts all even. 

 Exeunt ROSALIND and CELIA  DUKE SENIOR  I do remember in this shepherd boy 
 Some lively touches of my daughter's favour. 
 ORLANDO  My lord, the first time that I ever saw him 
 Methought he was a brother to your daughter: 
 But, my good lord, this boy is forest-born, 
 And hath been tutor'd in the rudiments 
 Of many desperate studies by his uncle, 
 Whom he reports to be a great magician, 
 Obscured in the circle of this forest. 

 Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY  JAQUES  There is, sure, another flood toward, and these 
 couples are coming to the ark. Here comes a pair of 
 very strange beasts, which in all tongues are called fools. 
 TOUCHSTONE  Salutation and greeting to you all! 
 JAQUES  Good my lord, bid him welcome: this is the 
 motley-minded gentleman that I have so often met in 
 the forest: he hath been a courtier, he swears. 
 TOUCHSTONE  If any man doubt that, let him put me to my 
 purgation. I have trod a measure; I have flattered 
 a lady; I have been politic with my friend, smooth 
 with mine enemy; I have undone three tailors; I have 
 had four quarrels, and like to have fought one. 
 JAQUES  And how was that ta'en up? 
 TOUCHSTONE  Faith, we met, and found the quarrel was upon the 
 seventh cause. 
 JAQUES  How seventh cause? Good my lord, like this fellow. 
 DUKE SENIOR  I like him very well. 
 TOUCHSTONE  God 'ild you, sir; I desire you of the like. I 
 press in here, sir, amongst the rest of the country 
 copulatives, to swear and to forswear: according as 
 marriage binds and blood breaks: a poor virgin, 
 sir, an ill-favoured thing, sir, but mine own; a poor 
 humour of mine, sir, to take that that no man else 
 will: rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a 
 poor house; as your pearl in your foul oyster. 
 DUKE SENIOR  By my faith, he is very swift and sententious. 
 TOUCHSTONE  According to the fool's bolt, sir, and such dulcet diseases. 
 JAQUES  But, for the seventh cause; how did you find the 
 quarrel on the seventh cause? 
 TOUCHSTONE  Upon a lie seven times removed:--bear your body more 
 seeming, Audrey:--as thus, sir. I did dislike the 
 cut of a certain courtier's beard: he sent me word, 
 if I said his beard was not cut well, he was in the 
 mind it was: this is called the Retort Courteous. 
 If I sent him word again 'it was not well cut,' he 
 would send me word, he cut it to please himself: 
 this is called the Quip Modest. If again 'it was 
 not well cut,' he disabled my judgment: this is 
 called the Reply Churlish. If again 'it was not 
 well cut,' he would answer, I spake not true: this 
 is called the Reproof Valiant. If again 'it was not 
 well cut,' he would say I lied: this is called the 
 Counter-cheque Quarrelsome: and so to the Lie 
 Circumstantial and the Lie Direct. 
 JAQUES  And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut? 
 TOUCHSTONE  I durst go no further than the Lie Circumstantial, 
 nor he durst not give me the Lie Direct; and so we 
 measured swords and parted. 
 JAQUES  Can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie? 
 TOUCHSTONE  O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book; as you have 
 books for good manners: I will name you the degrees. 
 The first, the Retort Courteous; the second, the 
 Quip Modest; the third, the Reply Churlish; the 
 fourth, the Reproof Valiant; the fifth, the 
 Countercheque Quarrelsome; the sixth, the Lie with 
 Circumstance; the seventh, the Lie Direct. All 
 these you may avoid but the Lie Direct; and you may 
 avoid that too, with an If. I knew when seven 
 justices could not take up a quarrel, but when the 
 parties were met themselves, one of them thought but 
 of an If, as, 'If you said so, then I said so;' and 
 they shook hands and swore brothers. Your If is the 
 only peacemaker; much virtue in If. 
 JAQUES  Is not this a rare fellow, my lord? he's as good at 
 any thing and yet a fool. 
 DUKE SENIOR  He uses his folly like a stalking-horse and under 
 the presentation of that he shoots his wit. 

 Enter HYMEN, ROSALIND, and CELIA 
 Still Music  HYMEN  Then is there mirth in heaven, 
 When earthly things made even 
 Atone together. 
 Good duke, receive thy daughter 
 Hymen from heaven brought her, 
 Yea, brought her hither, 
 That thou mightst join her hand with his 
 Whose heart within his bosom is. 
 ROSALIND  [To DUKE SENIOR]  To you I give myself, for I am yours. 

 To ORLANDO  To you I give myself, for I am yours. 
 DUKE SENIOR  If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter. 
 ORLANDO  If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind. 
 PHEBE  If sight and shape be true, 
 Why then, my love adieu! 
 ROSALIND  I'll have no father, if you be not he: 
 I'll have no husband, if you be not he: 
 Nor ne'er wed woman, if you be not she. 
 HYMEN  Peace, ho! I bar confusion: 
 'Tis I must make conclusion 
 Of these most strange events: 
 Here's eight that must take hands 
 To join in Hymen's bands, 
 If truth holds true contents. 
 You and you no cross shall part: 
 You and you are heart in heart 
 You to his love must accord, 
 Or have a woman to your lord: 
 You and you are sure together, 
 As the winter to foul weather. 
 Whiles a wedlock-hymn we sing, 
 Feed yourselves with questioning; 
 That reason wonder may diminish, 
 How thus we met, and these things finish. 
 SONG. 
 Wedding is great Juno's crown: 
 O blessed bond of board and bed! 
 'Tis Hymen peoples every town; 
 High wedlock then be honoured: 
 Honour, high honour and renown, 
 To Hymen, god of every town! 
 DUKE SENIOR  O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me! 
 Even daughter, welcome, in no less degree. 
 PHEBE  I will not eat my word, now thou art mine; 
 Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine. 

 Enter JAQUES DE BOYS  JAQUES DE BOYS  Let me have audience for a word or two: 
 I am the second son of old Sir Rowland, 
 That bring these tidings to this fair assembly. 
 Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day 
 Men of great worth resorted to this forest, 
 Address'd a mighty power; which were on foot, 
 In his own conduct, purposely to take 
 His brother here and put him to the sword: 
 And to the skirts of this wild wood he came; 
 Where meeting with an old religious man, 
 After some question with him, was converted 
 Both from his enterprise and from the world, 
 His crown bequeathing to his banish'd brother, 
 And all their lands restored to them again 
 That were with him exiled. This to be true, 
 I do engage my life. 
 DUKE SENIOR  Welcome, young man; 
 Thou offer'st fairly to thy brothers' wedding: 
 To one his lands withheld, and to the other 
 A land itself at large, a potent dukedom. 
 First, in this forest, let us do those ends 
 That here were well begun and well begot: 
 And after, every of this happy number 
 That have endured shrewd days and nights with us 
 Shall share the good of our returned fortune, 
 According to the measure of their states. 
 Meantime, forget this new-fall'n dignity 
 And fall into our rustic revelry. 
 Play, music! And you, brides and bridegrooms all, 
 With measure heap'd in joy, to the measures fall. 
 JAQUES  Sir, by your patience. If I heard you rightly, 
 The duke hath put on a religious life 
 And thrown into neglect the pompous court? 
 JAQUES DE BOYS  He hath. 
 JAQUES  To him will I : out of these convertites 
 There is much matter to be heard and learn'd. 

 To DUKE SENIOR  You to your former honour I bequeath; 
 Your patience and your virtue well deserves it: 

 To ORLANDO  You to a love that your true faith doth merit: 

 To OLIVER  You to your land and love and great allies: 

 To SILVIUS  You to a long and well-deserved bed: 

 To TOUCHSTONE  And you to wrangling; for thy loving voyage 
 Is but for two months victuall'd. So, to your pleasures: 
 I am for other than for dancing measures. 
 DUKE SENIOR  Stay, Jaques, stay. 
 JAQUES  To see no pastime I	what you would have 
 I'll stay to know at your abandon'd cave. 

 Exit  DUKE SENIOR  Proceed, proceed: we will begin these rites, 
 As we do trust they'll end, in true delights. 

 A dance  EPILOGUE 
 ROSALIND  It is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue; 
 but it is no more unhandsome than to see the lord 
 the prologue. If it be true that good wine needs 
 no bush, 'tis true that a good play needs no 
 epilogue; yet to good wine they do use good bushes, 
 and good plays prove the better by the help of good 
 epilogues. What a case am I in then, that am 
 neither a good epilogue nor cannot insinuate with 
 you in the behalf of a good play! I am not 
 furnished like a beggar, therefore to beg will not 
 become me: my way is to conjure you; and I'll begin 
 with the women. I charge you, O women, for the love 
 you bear to men, to like as much of this play as 
 please you: and I charge you, O men, for the love 
 you bear to women--as I perceive by your simpering, 
 none of you hates them--that between you and the 
 women the play may please. If I were a woman I 
 would kiss as many of you as had beards that pleased 
 me, complexions that liked me and breaths that I 
 defied not: and, I am sure, as many as have good 
 beards or good faces or sweet breaths will, for my 
 kind offer, when I make curtsy, bid me farewell. 

 Exeunt 