SCENE IV. The forest. As You Like It  Shakespeare homepage  |  As You Like It  | Act 3, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE IV. The forest. 
 Enter ROSALIND and CELIA  ROSALIND  Never talk to me; I will weep. 
 CELIA  Do, I prithee; but yet have the grace to consider 
 that tears do not become a man. 
 ROSALIND  But have I not cause to weep? 
 CELIA  As good cause as one would desire; therefore weep. 
 ROSALIND  His very hair is of the dissembling colour. 
 CELIA  Something browner than Judas's marry, his kisses are 
 Judas's own children. 
 ROSALIND  I' faith, his hair is of a good colour. 
 CELIA  An excellent colour: your chestnut was ever the only colour. 
 ROSALIND  And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch 
 of holy bread. 
 CELIA  He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana: a nun 
 of winter's sisterhood kisses not more religiously; 
 the very ice of chastity is in them. 
 ROSALIND  But why did he swear he would come this morning, and 
 comes not? 
 CELIA  Nay, certainly, there is no truth in him. 
 ROSALIND  Do you think so? 
 CELIA  Yes; I think he is not a pick-purse nor a 
 horse-stealer, but for his verity in love, I do 
 think him as concave as a covered goblet or a 
 worm-eaten nut. 
 ROSALIND  Not true in love? 
 CELIA  Yes, when he is in; but I think he is not in. 
 ROSALIND  You have heard him swear downright he was. 
 CELIA  'Was' is not 'is:' besides, the oath of a lover is 
 no stronger than the word of a tapster; they are 
 both the confirmer of false reckonings. He attends 
 here in the forest on the duke your father. 
 ROSALIND  I met the duke yesterday and had much question with 
 him: he asked me of what parentage I was; I told 
 him, of as good as he; so he laughed and let me go. 
 But what talk we of fathers, when there is such a 
 man as Orlando? 
 CELIA  O, that's a brave man! he writes brave verses, 
 speaks brave words, swears brave oaths and breaks 
 them bravely, quite traverse, athwart the heart of 
 his lover; as a puisny tilter, that spurs his horse 
 but on one side, breaks his staff like a noble 
 goose: but all's brave that youth mounts and folly 
 guides. Who comes here? 

 Enter CORIN  CORIN  Mistress and master, you have oft inquired 
 After the shepherd that complain'd of love, 
 Who you saw sitting by me on the turf, 
 Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess 
 That was his mistress. 
 CELIA  Well, and what of him? 
 CORIN  If you will see a pageant truly play'd, 
 Between the pale complexion of true love 
 And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain, 
 Go hence a little and I shall conduct you, 
 If you will mark it. 
 ROSALIND  O, come, let us remove: 
 The sight of lovers feedeth those in love. 
 Bring us to this sight, and you shall say 
 I'll prove a busy actor in their play. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  As You Like It  | Act 3, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 