SCENE V. Alexandria. CLEOPATRA's palace. Antony and Cleopatra  Shakespeare homepage  |  Antony and Cleopatra  | Act 2, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE V. Alexandria. CLEOPATRA's palace. 
 Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and ALEXAS  CLEOPATRA  Give me some music; music, moody food 
 Of us that trade in love. 
 Attendants  The music, ho! 

 Enter MARDIAN  CLEOPATRA  Let it alone; let's to billiards: come, Charmian. 
 CHARMIAN  My arm is sore; best play with Mardian. 
 CLEOPATRA  As well a woman with an eunuch play'd 
 As with a woman. Come, you'll play with me, sir? 
 MARDIAN  As well as I can, madam. 
 CLEOPATRA  And when good will is show'd, though't come 
 too short, 
 The actor may plead pardon. I'll none now: 
 Give me mine angle; we'll to the river: there, 
 My music playing far off, I will betray 
 Tawny-finn'd fishes; my bended hook shall pierce 
 Their slimy jaws; and, as I draw them up, 
 I'll think them every one an Antony, 
 And say 'Ah, ha! you're caught.' 
 CHARMIAN  'Twas merry when 
 You wager'd on your angling; when your diver 
 Did hang a salt-fish on his hook, which he 
 With fervency drew up. 
 CLEOPATRA  That time,--O times!-- 
 I laugh'd him out of patience; and that night 
 I laugh'd him into patience; and next morn, 
 Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed; 
 Then put my tires and mantles on him, whilst 
 I wore his sword Philippan. 

 Enter a Messenger  O, from Italy 
 Ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears, 
 That long time have been barren. 
 Messenger  Madam, madam,-- 
 CLEOPATRA  Antonius dead!--If thou say so, villain, 
 Thou kill'st thy mistress: but well and free, 
 If thou so yield him, there is gold, and here 
 My bluest veins to kiss; a hand that kings 
 Have lipp'd, and trembled kissing. 
 Messenger  First, madam, he is well. 
 CLEOPATRA  Why, there's more gold. 
 But, sirrah, mark, we use 
 To say the dead are well: bring it to that, 
 The gold I give thee will I melt and pour 
 Down thy ill-uttering throat. 
 Messenger  Good madam, hear me. 
 CLEOPATRA  Well, go to, I will; 
 But there's no goodness in thy face: if Antony 
 Be free and healthful,--so tart a favour 
 To trumpet such good tidings! If not well, 
 Thou shouldst come like a Fury crown'd with snakes, 
 Not like a formal man. 
 Messenger  Will't please you hear me? 
 CLEOPATRA  I have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak'st: 
 Yet if thou say Antony lives, is well, 
 Or friends with Caesar, or not captive to him, 
 I'll set thee in a shower of gold, and hail 
 Rich pearls upon thee. 
 Messenger  Madam, he's well. 
 CLEOPATRA  Well said. 
 Messenger  And friends with Caesar. 
 CLEOPATRA  Thou'rt an honest man. 
 Messenger  Caesar and he are greater friends than ever. 
 CLEOPATRA  Make thee a fortune from me. 
 Messenger  But yet, madam,-- 
 CLEOPATRA  I do not like 'But yet,' it does allay 
 The good precedence; fie upon 'But yet'! 
 'But yet' is as a gaoler to bring forth 
 Some monstrous malefactor. Prithee, friend, 
 Pour out the pack of matter to mine ear, 
 The good and bad together: he's friends with Caesar: 
 In state of health thou say'st; and thou say'st free. 
 Messenger  Free, madam! no; I made no such report: 
 He's bound unto Octavia. 
 CLEOPATRA  For what good turn? 
 Messenger  For the best turn i' the bed. 
 CLEOPATRA  I am pale, Charmian. 
 Messenger  Madam, he's married to Octavia. 
 CLEOPATRA  The most infectious pestilence upon thee! 

 Strikes him down  Messenger  Good madam, patience. 
 CLEOPATRA  What say you? Hence, 

 Strikes him again  Horrible villain! or I'll spurn thine eyes 
 Like balls before me; I'll unhair thy head: 

 She hales him up and down  Thou shalt be whipp'd with wire, and stew'd in brine, 
 Smarting in lingering pickle. 
 Messenger  Gracious madam, 
 I that do bring the news made not the match. 
 CLEOPATRA  Say 'tis not so, a province I will give thee, 
 And make thy fortunes proud: the blow thou hadst 
 Shall make thy peace for moving me to rage; 
 And I will boot thee with what gift beside 
 Thy modesty can beg. 
 Messenger  He's married, madam. 
 CLEOPATRA  Rogue, thou hast lived too long. 

 Draws a knife  Messenger  Nay, then I'll run. 
 What mean you, madam? I have made no fault. 

 Exit  CHARMIAN  Good madam, keep yourself within yourself: 
 The man is innocent. 
 CLEOPATRA  Some innocents 'scape not the thunderbolt. 
 Melt Egypt into Nile! and kindly creatures 
 Turn all to serpents! Call the slave again: 
 Though I am mad, I will not bite him: call. 
 CHARMIAN  He is afeard to come. 
 CLEOPATRA  I will not hurt him. 

 Exit CHARMIAN  These hands do lack nobility, that they strike 
 A meaner than myself; since I myself 
 Have given myself the cause. 

 Re-enter CHARMIAN and Messenger  Come hither, sir. 
 Though it be honest, it is never good 
 To bring bad news: give to a gracious message. 
 An host of tongues; but let ill tidings tell 
 Themselves when they be felt. 
 Messenger  I have done my duty. 
 CLEOPATRA  Is he married? 
 I cannot hate thee worser than I do, 
 If thou again say 'Yes.' 
 Messenger  He's married, madam. 
 CLEOPATRA  The gods confound thee! dost thou hold there still? 
 Messenger  Should I lie, madam? 
 CLEOPATRA  O, I would thou didst, 
 So half my Egypt were submerged and made 
 A cistern for scaled snakes! Go, get thee hence: 
 Hadst thou Narcissus in thy face, to me 
 Thou wouldst appear most ugly. He is married? 
 Messenger  I crave your highness' pardon. 
 CLEOPATRA  He is married? 
 Messenger  Take no offence that I would not offend you: 
 To punish me for what you make me do. 
 Seems much unequal: he's married to Octavia. 
 CLEOPATRA  O, that his fault should make a knave of thee, 
 That art not what thou'rt sure of! Get thee hence: 
 The merchandise which thou hast brought from Rome 
 Are all too dear for me: lie they upon thy hand, 
 And be undone by 'em! 

 Exit Messenger  CHARMIAN  Good your highness, patience. 
 CLEOPATRA  In praising Antony, I have dispraised Caesar. 
 CHARMIAN  Many times, madam. 
 CLEOPATRA  I am paid for't now. 
 Lead me from hence: 
 I faint: O Iras, Charmian! 'tis no matter. 
 Go to the fellow, good Alexas; bid him 
 Report the feature of Octavia, her years, 
 Her inclination, let him not leave out 
 The colour of her hair: bring me word quickly. 

 Exit ALEXAS  Let him for ever go:--let him not--Charmian, 
 Though he be painted one way like a Gorgon, 
 The other way's a Mars. Bid you Alexas 

 To MARDIAN  Bring me word how tall she is. Pity me, Charmian, 
 But do not speak to me. Lead me to my chamber. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Antony and Cleopatra  | Act 2, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 