SCENE XIV. The same. Another room. Antony and Cleopatra  Shakespeare homepage  |  Antony and Cleopatra  | Act 4, Scene 14 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE XIV. The same. Another room. 
 Enter MARK ANTONY and EROS  MARK ANTONY  Eros, thou yet behold'st me? 
 EROS  Ay, noble lord. 
 MARK ANTONY  Sometimes we see a cloud that's dragonish; 
 A vapour sometime like a bear or lion, 
 A tower'd citadel, a pendent rock, 
 A forked mountain, or blue promontory 
 With trees upon't, that nod unto the world, 
 And mock our eyes with air: thou hast seen 
 these signs; 
 They are black vesper's pageants. 
 EROS  Ay, my lord, 
 MARK ANTONY  That which is now a horse, even with a thought 
 The rack dislimns, and makes it indistinct, 
 As water is in water. 
 EROS  It does, my lord. 
 MARK ANTONY  My good knave Eros, now thy captain is 
 Even such a body: here I am Antony: 
 Yet cannot hold this visible shape, my knave. 
 I made these wars for Egypt: and the queen,-- 
 Whose heart I thought I had, for she had mine; 
 Which whilst it was mine had annex'd unto't 
 A million more, now lost,--she, Eros, has 
 Pack'd cards with Caesar, and false-play'd my glory 
 Unto an enemy's triumph. 
 Nay, weep not, gentle Eros; there is left us 
 Ourselves to end ourselves. 

 Enter MARDIAN  O! thy vile lady! 
 She has robb'd me of my sword. 
 MARDIAN  No, Antony; 
 My mistress loved thee, and her fortunes mingled 
 With thine entirely. 
 MARK ANTONY  Hence, saucy eunuch; peace! 
 She hath betray'd me and shall die the death. 
 MARDIAN  Death of one person can be paid but once, 
 And that she has discharged: what thou wouldst do 
 Is done unto thy hand: the last she spake 
 Was 'Antony! most noble Antony!' 
 Then in the midst a tearing groan did break 
 The name of Antony; it was divided 
 Between her heart and lips: she render'd life, 
 Thy name so buried in her. 
 MARK ANTONY  Dead, then? 
 MARDIAN  Dead. 
 MARK ANTONY  Unarm, Eros; the long day's task is done, 
 And we must sleep. 

 To MARDIAN  That thou depart'st hence safe, 
 Does pay thy labour richly; go. 

 Exit MARDIAN  Off, pluck off: 
 The seven-fold shield of Ajax cannot keep 
 The battery from my heart. O, cleave, my sides! 
 Heart, once be stronger than thy continent, 
 Crack thy frail case! Apace, Eros, apace. 
 No more a soldier: bruised pieces, go; 
 You have been nobly borne. From me awhile. 

 Exit EROS  I will o'ertake thee, Cleopatra, and 
 Weep for my pardon. So it must be, for now 
 All length is torture: since the torch is out, 
 Lie down, and stray no farther: now all labour 
 Mars what it does; yea, very force entangles 
 Itself with strength: seal then, and all is done. 
 Eros!--I come, my queen:--Eros!--Stay for me: 
 Where souls do couch on flowers, we'll hand in hand, 
 And with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze: 
 Dido and her AEneas shall want troops, 
 And all the haunt be ours. Come, Eros, Eros! 

 Re-enter EROS  EROS  What would my lord? 
 MARK ANTONY  Since Cleopatra died, 
 I have lived in such dishonour, that the gods 
 Detest my baseness. I, that with my sword 
 Quarter'd the world, and o'er green Neptune's back 
 With ships made cities, condemn myself to lack 
 The courage of a woman; less noble mind 
 Than she which by her death our Caesar tells 
 'I am conqueror of myself.' Thou art sworn, Eros, 
 That, when the exigent should come, which now 
 Is come indeed, when I should see behind me 
 The inevitable prosecution of 
 Disgrace and horror, that, on my command, 
 Thou then wouldst kill me: do't; the time is come: 
 Thou strikest not me, 'tis Caesar thou defeat'st. 
 Put colour in thy cheek. 
 EROS  The gods withhold me! 
 Shall I do that which all the Parthian darts, 
 Though enemy, lost aim, and could not? 
 MARK ANTONY  Eros, 
 Wouldst thou be window'd in great Rome and see 
 Thy master thus with pleach'd arms, bending down 
 His corrigible neck, his face subdued 
 To penetrative shame, whilst the wheel'd seat 
 Of fortunate Caesar, drawn before him, branded 
 His baseness that ensued? 
 EROS  I would not see't. 
 MARK ANTONY  Come, then; for with a wound I must be cured. 
 Draw that thy honest sword, which thou hast worn 
 Most useful for thy country. 
 EROS  O, sir, pardon me! 
 MARK ANTONY  When I did make thee free, sworest thou not then 
 To do this when I bade thee? Do it at once; 
 Or thy precedent services are all 
 But accidents unpurposed. Draw, and come. 
 EROS  Turn from me, then, that noble countenance, 
 Wherein the worship of the whole world lies. 
 MARK ANTONY  Lo thee! 

 Turning from him  EROS  My sword is drawn. 
 MARK ANTONY  Then let it do at once 
 The thing why thou hast drawn it. 
 EROS  My dear master, 
 My captain, and my emperor, let me say, 
 Before I strike this bloody stroke, farewell. 
 MARK ANTONY  'Tis said, man; and farewell. 
 EROS  Farewell, great chief. Shall I strike now? 
 MARK ANTONY  Now, Eros. 
 EROS  Why, there then: thus I do escape the sorrow 
 Of Antony's death. 

 Kills himself  MARK ANTONY  Thrice-nobler than myself! 
 Thou teachest me, O valiant Eros, what 
 I should, and thou couldst not. My queen and Eros 
 Have by their brave instruction got upon me 
 A nobleness in record: but I will be 
 A bridegroom in my death, and run into't 
 As to a lover's bed. Come, then; and, Eros, 
 Thy master dies thy scholar: to do thus 

 Falling on his sword  I learn'd of thee. How! not dead? not dead? 
 The guard, ho! O, dispatch me! 

 Enter DERCETAS and Guard  First Guard  What's the noise? 
 MARK ANTONY  I have done my work in, friends: O, make an end 
 Of what I have begun. 
 Second Guard  The star is fall'n. 
 First Guard  And time is at his period. 
 All  Alas, and woe! 
 MARK ANTONY  Let him that loves me strike me dead. 
 First Guard  Not I. 
 Second Guard  Nor I. 
 Third Guard  Nor any one. 

 Exeunt Guard  DERCETAS  Thy death and fortunes bid thy followers fly. 
 This sword but shown to Caesar, with this tidings, 
 Shall enter me with him. 

 Enter DIOMEDES  DIOMEDES  Where's Antony? 
 DERCETAS  There, Diomed there. 
 DIOMEDES  Lives he? 
 Wilt thou not answer, man? 

 Exit DERCETAS  MARK ANTONY  Art thou there, Diomed? Draw thy sword, and give me 
 Sufficing strokes for death. 
 DIOMEDES  Most absolute lord, 
 My mistress Cleopatra sent me to thee. 
 MARK ANTONY  When did she send thee? 
 DIOMEDES  Now, my lord. 
 MARK ANTONY  Where is she? 
 DIOMEDES  Lock'd in her monument. She had a prophesying fear 
 Of what hath come to pass: for when she saw-- 
 Which never shall be found--you did suspect 
 She had disposed with Caesar, and that your rage 
 Would not be purged, she sent you word she was dead; 
 But, fearing since how it might work, hath sent 
 Me to proclaim the truth; and I am come, 
 I dread, too late. 
 MARK ANTONY  Too late, good Diomed: call my guard, I prithee. 
 DIOMEDES  What, ho, the emperor's guard! The guard, what, ho! 
 Come, your lord calls! 

 Enter four or five of the Guard of MARK ANTONY  MARK ANTONY  Bear me, good friends, where Cleopatra bides; 
 'Tis the last service that I shall command you. 
 First Guard  Woe, woe are we, sir, you may not live to wear 
 All your true followers out. 
 All  Most heavy day! 
 MARK ANTONY  Nay, good my fellows, do not please sharp fate 
 To grace it with your sorrows: bid that welcome 
 Which comes to punish us, and we punish it 
 Seeming to bear it lightly. Take me up: 
 I have led you oft: carry me now, good friends, 
 And have my thanks for all. 

 Exeunt, bearing MARK ANTONY  Shakespeare homepage  |  Antony and Cleopatra  | Act 4, Scene 14 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 