SCENE III. The same. The Forum. The Tragedy of Coriolanus  Shakespeare homepage  |  Coriolanus  | Act 2, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. The same. The Forum. 
 Enter seven or eight Citizens  First Citizen  Once, if he do require our voices, we ought not to deny him. 
 Second Citizen  We may, sir, if we will. 
 Third Citizen  We have power in ourselves to do it, but it is a 
 power that we have no power to do; for if he show us 
 his wounds and tell us his deeds, we are to put our 
 tongues into those wounds and speak for them; so, if 
 he tell us his noble deeds, we must also tell him 
 our noble acceptance of them. Ingratitude is 
 monstrous, and for the multitude to be ingrateful, 
 were to make a monster of the multitude: of the 
 which we being members, should bring ourselves to be 
 monstrous members. 
 First Citizen  And to make us no better thought of, a little help 
 will serve; for once we stood up about the corn, he 
 himself stuck not to call us the many-headed multitude. 
 Third Citizen  We have been called so of many; not that our heads 
 are some brown, some black, some auburn, some bald, 
 but that our wits are so diversely coloured: and 
 truly I think if all our wits were to issue out of 
 one skull, they would fly east, west, north, south, 
 and their consent of one direct way should be at 
 once to all the points o' the compass. 
 Second Citizen  Think you so? Which way do you judge my wit would 
 fly? 
 Third Citizen  Nay, your wit will not so soon out as another man's 
 will;'tis strongly wedged up in a block-head, but 
 if it were at liberty, 'twould, sure, southward. 
 Second Citizen  Why that way? 
 Third Citizen  To lose itself in a fog, where being three parts 
 melted away with rotten dews, the fourth would return 
 for conscience sake, to help to get thee a wife. 
 Second Citizen  You are never without your tricks: you may, you may. 
 Third Citizen  Are you all resolved to give your voices? But 
 that's no matter, the greater part carries it. I 
 say, if he would incline to the people, there was 
 never a worthier man. 

 Enter CORIOLANUS in a gown of humility, with MENENIUS  Here he comes, and in the gown of humility: mark his 
 behavior. We are not to stay all together, but to 
 come by him where he stands, by ones, by twos, and 
 by threes. He's to make his requests by 
 particulars; wherein every one of us has a single 
 honour, in giving him our own voices with our own 
 tongues: therefore follow me, and I direct you how 
 you shall go by him. 
 All  Content, content. 

 Exeunt Citizens  MENENIUS  O sir, you are not right: have you not known 
 The worthiest men have done't? 
 CORIOLANUS  What must I say? 
 'I Pray, sir'--Plague upon't! I cannot bring 
 My tongue to such a pace:--'Look, sir, my wounds! 
 I got them in my country's service, when 
 Some certain of your brethren roar'd and ran 
 From the noise of our own drums.' 
 MENENIUS  O me, the gods! 
 You must not speak of that: you must desire them 
 To think upon you. 
 CORIOLANUS  Think upon me! hang 'em! 
 I would they would forget me, like the virtues 
 Which our divines lose by 'em. 
 MENENIUS  You'll mar all: 
 I'll leave you: pray you, speak to 'em, I pray you, 
 In wholesome manner. 

 Exit  CORIOLANUS  Bid them wash their faces 
 And keep their teeth clean. 

 Re-enter two of the Citizens  So, here comes a brace. 

 Re-enter a third Citizen  You know the cause, air, of my standing here. 
 Third Citizen  We do, sir; tell us what hath brought you to't. 
 CORIOLANUS  Mine own desert. 
 Second Citizen  Your own desert! 
 CORIOLANUS  Ay, but not mine own desire. 
 Third Citizen  How not your own desire? 
 CORIOLANUS  No, sir,'twas never my desire yet to trouble the 
 poor with begging. 
 Third Citizen  You must think, if we give you any thing, we hope to 
 gain by you. 
 CORIOLANUS  Well then, I pray, your price o' the consulship? 
 First Citizen  The price is to ask it kindly. 
 CORIOLANUS  Kindly! Sir, I pray, let me ha't: I have wounds to 
 show you, which shall be yours in private. Your 
 good voice, sir; what say you? 
 Second Citizen  You shall ha' it, worthy sir. 
 CORIOLANUS  A match, sir. There's in all two worthy voices 
 begged. I have your alms: adieu. 
 Third Citizen  But this is something odd. 
 Second Citizen  An 'twere to give again,--but 'tis no matter. 

 Exeunt the three Citizens 
 Re-enter two other Citizens  CORIOLANUS  Pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your 
 voices that I may be consul, I have here the 
 customary gown. 
 Fourth Citizen  You have deserved nobly of your country, and you 
 have not deserved nobly. 
 CORIOLANUS  Your enigma? 
 Fourth Citizen  You have been a scourge to her enemies, you have 
 been a rod to her friends; you have not indeed loved 
 the common people. 
 CORIOLANUS  You should account me the more virtuous that I have 
 not been common in my love. I will, sir, flatter my 
 sworn brother, the people, to earn a dearer 
 estimation of them; 'tis a condition they account 
 gentle: and since the wisdom of their choice is 
 rather to have my hat than my heart, I will practise 
 the insinuating nod and be off to them most 
 counterfeitly; that is, sir, I will counterfeit the 
 bewitchment of some popular man and give it 
 bountiful to the desirers. Therefore, beseech you, 
 I may be consul. 
 Fifth Citizen  We hope to find you our friend; and therefore give 
 you our voices heartily. 
 Fourth Citizen  You have received many wounds for your country. 
 CORIOLANUS  I will not seal your knowledge with showing them. I 
 will make much of your voices, and so trouble you no further. 
 Both Citizens  The gods give you joy, sir, heartily! 

 Exeunt  CORIOLANUS  Most sweet voices! 
 Better it is to die, better to starve, 
 Than crave the hire which first we do deserve. 
 Why in this woolvish toge should I stand here, 
 To beg of Hob and Dick, that do appear, 
 Their needless vouches? Custom calls me to't: 
 What custom wills, in all things should we do't, 
 The dust on antique time would lie unswept, 
 And mountainous error be too highly heapt 
 For truth to o'er-peer. Rather than fool it so, 
 Let the high office and the honour go 
 To one that would do thus. I am half through; 
 The one part suffer'd, the other will I do. 

 Re-enter three Citizens more  Here come more voices. 
 Your voices: for your voices I have fought; 
 Watch'd for your voices; for Your voices bear 
 Of wounds two dozen odd; battles thrice six 
 I have seen and heard of; for your voices have 
 Done many things, some less, some more your voices: 
 Indeed I would be consul. 
 Sixth Citizen  He has done nobly, and cannot go without any honest 
 man's voice. 
 Seventh Citizen  Therefore let him be consul: the gods give him joy, 
 and make him good friend to the people! 
 All Citizens  Amen, amen. God save thee, noble consul! 

 Exeunt  CORIOLANUS  Worthy voices! 

 Re-enter MENENIUS, with BRUTUS and SICINIUS  MENENIUS  You have stood your limitation; and the tribunes 
 Endue you with the people's voice: remains 
 That, in the official marks invested, you 
 Anon do meet the senate. 
 CORIOLANUS  Is this done? 
 SICINIUS  The custom of request you have discharged: 
 The people do admit you, and are summon'd 
 To meet anon, upon your approbation. 
 CORIOLANUS  Where? at the senate-house? 
 SICINIUS  There, Coriolanus. 
 CORIOLANUS  May I change these garments? 
 SICINIUS  You may, sir. 
 CORIOLANUS  That I'll straight do; and, knowing myself again, 
 Repair to the senate-house. 
 MENENIUS  I'll keep you company. Will you along? 
 BRUTUS  We stay here for the people. 
 SICINIUS  Fare you well. 

 Exeunt CORIOLANUS and MENENIUS  He has it now, and by his looks methink 
 'Tis warm at 's heart. 
 BRUTUS  With a proud heart he wore his humble weeds. 
 will you dismiss the people? 

 Re-enter Citizens  SICINIUS  How now, my masters! have you chose this man? 
 First Citizen  He has our voices, sir. 
 BRUTUS  We pray the gods he may deserve your loves. 
 Second Citizen  Amen, sir: to my poor unworthy notice, 
 He mock'd us when he begg'd our voices. 
 Third Citizen  Certainly 
 He flouted us downright. 
 First Citizen  No,'tis his kind of speech: he did not mock us. 
 Second Citizen  Not one amongst us, save yourself, but says 
 He used us scornfully: he should have show'd us 
 His marks of merit, wounds received for's country. 
 SICINIUS  Why, so he did, I am sure. 
 Citizens  No, no; no man saw 'em. 
 Third Citizen  He said he had wounds, which he could show 
 in private; 
 And with his hat, thus waving it in scorn, 
 'I would be consul,' says he: 'aged custom, 
 But by your voices, will not so permit me; 
 Your voices therefore.' When we granted that, 
 Here was 'I thank you for your voices: thank you: 
 Your most sweet voices: now you have left 
 your voices, 
 I have no further with you.' Was not this mockery? 
 SICINIUS  Why either were you ignorant to see't, 
 Or, seeing it, of such childish friendliness 
 To yield your voices? 
 BRUTUS  Could you not have told him 
 As you were lesson'd, when he had no power, 
 But was a petty servant to the state, 
 He was your enemy, ever spake against 
 Your liberties and the charters that you bear 
 I' the body of the weal; and now, arriving 
 A place of potency and sway o' the state, 
 If he should still malignantly remain 
 Fast foe to the plebeii, your voices might 
 Be curses to yourselves? You should have said 
 That as his worthy deeds did claim no less 
 Than what he stood for, so his gracious nature 
 Would think upon you for your voices and 
 Translate his malice towards you into love, 
 Standing your friendly lord. 
 SICINIUS  Thus to have said, 
 As you were fore-advised, had touch'd his spirit 
 And tried his inclination; from him pluck'd 
 Either his gracious promise, which you might, 
 As cause had call'd you up, have held him to 
 Or else it would have gall'd his surly nature, 
 Which easily endures not article 
 Tying him to aught; so putting him to rage, 
 You should have ta'en the advantage of his choler 
 And pass'd him unelected. 
 BRUTUS  Did you perceive 
 He did solicit you in free contempt 
 When he did need your loves, and do you think 
 That his contempt shall not be bruising to you, 
 When he hath power to crush? Why, had your bodies 
 No heart among you? or had you tongues to cry 
 Against the rectorship of judgment? 
 SICINIUS  Have you 
 Ere now denied the asker? and now again 
 Of him that did not ask, but mock, bestow 
 Your sued-for tongues? 
 Third Citizen  He's not confirm'd; we may deny him yet. 
 Second Citizen  And will deny him: 
 I'll have five hundred voices of that sound. 
 First Citizen  I twice five hundred and their friends to piece 'em. 
 BRUTUS  Get you hence instantly, and tell those friends, 
 They have chose a consul that will from them take 
 Their liberties; make them of no more voice 
 Than dogs that are as often beat for barking 
 As therefore kept to do so. 
 SICINIUS  Let them assemble, 
 And on a safer judgment all revoke 
 Your ignorant election; enforce his pride, 
 And his old hate unto you; besides, forget not 
 With what contempt he wore the humble weed, 
 How in his suit he scorn'd you; but your loves, 
 Thinking upon his services, took from you 
 The apprehension of his present portance, 
 Which most gibingly, ungravely, he did fashion 
 After the inveterate hate he bears you. 
 BRUTUS  Lay 
 A fault on us, your tribunes; that we laboured, 
 No impediment between, but that you must 
 Cast your election on him. 
 SICINIUS  Say, you chose him 
 More after our commandment than as guided 
 By your own true affections, and that your minds, 
 Preoccupied with what you rather must do 
 Than what you should, made you against the grain 
 To voice him consul: lay the fault on us. 
 BRUTUS  Ay, spare us not. Say we read lectures to you. 
 How youngly he began to serve his country, 
 How long continued, and what stock he springs of, 
 The noble house o' the Marcians, from whence came 
 That Ancus Marcius, Numa's daughter's son, 
 Who, after great Hostilius, here was king; 
 Of the same house Publius and Quintus were, 
 That our beat water brought by conduits hither; 
 And  [Censorinus,]  nobly named so, 
 Twice being  [by the people chosen]  censor, 
 Was his great ancestor. 
 SICINIUS  One thus descended, 
 That hath beside well in his person wrought 
 To be set high in place, we did commend 
 To your remembrances: but you have found, 
 Scaling his present bearing with his past, 
 That he's your fixed enemy, and revoke 
 Your sudden approbation. 
 BRUTUS  Say, you ne'er had done't-- 
 Harp on that still--but by our putting on; 
 And presently, when you have drawn your number, 
 Repair to the Capitol. 
 All  We will so: almost all 
 Repent in their election. 

 Exeunt Citizens  BRUTUS  Let them go on; 
 This mutiny were better put in hazard, 
 Than stay, past doubt, for greater: 
 If, as his nature is, he fall in rage 
 With their refusal, both observe and answer 
 The vantage of his anger. 
 SICINIUS  To the Capitol, come: 
 We will be there before the stream o' the people; 
 And this shall seem, as partly 'tis, their own, 
 Which we have goaded onward. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Coriolanus  | Act 2, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 