SCENE X. The camp of the Volsces. The Tragedy of Coriolanus  Shakespeare homepage  |  Coriolanus  | Act 1, Scene 10 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE X. The camp of the Volsces. 
 A flourish. Cornets. Enter TULLUS AUFIDIUS, bloody, with two or three Soldiers  AUFIDIUS  The town is ta'en! 
 First Soldier  'Twill be deliver'd back on good condition. 
 AUFIDIUS  Condition! 
 I would I were a Roman; for I cannot, 
 Being a Volsce, be that I am. Condition! 
 What good condition can a treaty find 
 I' the part that is at mercy? Five times, Marcius, 
 I have fought with thee: so often hast thou beat me, 
 And wouldst do so, I think, should we encounter 
 As often as we eat. By the elements, 
 If e'er again I meet him beard to beard, 
 He's mine, or I am his: mine emulation 
 Hath not that honour in't it had; for where 
 I thought to crush him in an equal force, 
 True sword to sword, I'll potch at him some way 
 Or wrath or craft may get him. 
 First Soldier  He's the devil. 
 AUFIDIUS  Bolder, though not so subtle. My valour's poison'd 
 With only suffering stain by him; for him 
 Shall fly out of itself: nor sleep nor sanctuary, 
 Being naked, sick, nor fane nor Capitol, 
 The prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice, 
 Embarquements all of fury, shall lift up 
 Their rotten privilege and custom 'gainst 
 My hate to Marcius: where I find him, were it 
 At home, upon my brother's guard, even there, 
 Against the hospitable canon, would I 
 Wash my fierce hand in's heart. Go you to the city; 
 Learn how 'tis held; and what they are that must 
 Be hostages for Rome. 
 First Soldier  Will not you go? 
 AUFIDIUS  I am attended at the cypress grove: I pray you-- 
 'Tis south the city mills--bring me word thither 
 How the world goes, that to the pace of it 
 I may spur on my journey. 
 First Soldier  I shall, sir. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Coriolanus  | Act 1, Scene 10 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 