SCENE II. Corioli. The Senate-house. The Tragedy of Coriolanus  Shakespeare homepage  |  Coriolanus  | Act 1, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. Corioli. The Senate-house. 
 Enter TULLUS AUFIDIUS and certain Senators  First Senator  So, your opinion is, Aufidius, 
 That they of Rome are entered in our counsels 
 And know how we proceed. 
 AUFIDIUS  Is it not yours? 
 What ever have been thought on in this state, 
 That could be brought to bodily act ere Rome 
 Had circumvention? 'Tis not four days gone 
 Since I heard thence; these are the words: I think 
 I have the letter here; yes, here it is. 

 Reads  'They have press'd a power, but it is not known 
 Whether for east or west: the dearth is great; 
 The people mutinous; and it is rumour'd, 
 Cominius, Marcius your old enemy, 
 Who is of Rome worse hated than of you, 
 And Titus Lartius, a most valiant Roman, 
 These three lead on this preparation 
 Whither 'tis bent: most likely 'tis for you: 
 Consider of it.' 
 First Senator  Our army's in the field 
 We never yet made doubt but Rome was ready 
 To answer us. 
 AUFIDIUS  Nor did you think it folly 
 To keep your great pretences veil'd till when 
 They needs must show themselves; which 
 in the hatching, 
 It seem'd, appear'd to Rome. By the discovery. 
 We shall be shorten'd in our aim, which was 
 To take in many towns ere almost Rome 
 Should know we were afoot. 
 Second Senator  Noble Aufidius, 
 Take your commission; hie you to your bands: 
 Let us alone to guard Corioli: 
 If they set down before 's, for the remove 
 Bring your army; but, I think, you'll find 
 They've not prepared for us. 
 AUFIDIUS  O, doubt not that; 
 I speak from certainties. Nay, more, 
 Some parcels of their power are forth already, 
 And only hitherward. I leave your honours. 
 If we and Caius Marcius chance to meet, 
 'Tis sworn between us we shall ever strike 
 Till one can do no more. 
 All  The gods assist you! 
 AUFIDIUS  And keep your honours safe! 
 First Senator  Farewell. 
 Second Senator  Farewell. 
 All  Farewell. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Coriolanus  | Act 1, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 