SCENE I. Rome. A public place. The Tragedy of Coriolanus  Shakespeare homepage  |  Coriolanus  | Act 2, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. Rome. A public place. 
 Enter MENENIUS with the two Tribunes of the people, SICINIUS and BRUTUS.  MENENIUS  The augurer tells me we shall have news to-night. 
 BRUTUS  Good or bad? 
 MENENIUS  Not according to the prayer of the people, for they 
 love not Marcius. 
 SICINIUS  Nature teaches beasts to know their friends. 
 MENENIUS  Pray you, who does the wolf love? 
 SICINIUS  The lamb. 
 MENENIUS  Ay, to devour him; as the hungry plebeians would the 
 noble Marcius. 
 BRUTUS  He's a lamb indeed, that baes like a bear. 
 MENENIUS  He's a bear indeed, that lives like a lamb. You two 
 are old men: tell me one thing that I shall ask you. 
 Both  Well, sir. 
 MENENIUS  In what enormity is Marcius poor in, that you two 
 have not in abundance? 
 BRUTUS  He's poor in no one fault, but stored with all. 
 SICINIUS  Especially in pride. 
 BRUTUS  And topping all others in boasting. 
 MENENIUS  This is strange now: do you two know how you are 
 censured here in the city, I mean of us o' the 
 right-hand file? do you? 
 Both  Why, how are we censured? 
 MENENIUS  Because you talk of pride now,--will you not be angry? 
 Both  Well, well, sir, well. 
 MENENIUS  Why, 'tis no great matter; for a very little thief of 
 occasion will rob you of a great deal of patience: 
 give your dispositions the reins, and be angry at 
 your pleasures; at the least if you take it as a 
 pleasure to you in being so. You blame Marcius for 
 being proud? 
 BRUTUS  We do it not alone, sir. 
 MENENIUS  I know you can do very little alone; for your helps 
 are many, or else your actions would grow wondrous 
 single: your abilities are too infant-like for 
 doing much alone. You talk of pride: O that you 
 could turn your eyes toward the napes of your necks, 
 and make but an interior survey of your good selves! 
 O that you could! 
 BRUTUS  What then, sir? 
 MENENIUS  Why, then you should discover a brace of unmeriting, 
 proud, violent, testy magistrates, alias fools, as 
 any in Rome. 
 SICINIUS  Menenius, you are known well enough too. 
 MENENIUS  I am known to be a humorous patrician, and one that 
 loves a cup of hot wine with not a drop of allaying 
 Tiber in't; said to be something imperfect in 
 favouring the first complaint; hasty and tinder-like 
 upon too trivial motion; one that converses more 
 with the buttock of the night than with the forehead 
 of the morning: what I think I utter, and spend my 
 malice in my breath. Meeting two such wealsmen as 
 you are--I cannot call you Lycurguses--if the drink 
 you give me touch my palate adversely, I make a 
 crooked face at it. I can't say your worships have 
 delivered the matter well, when I find the ass in 
 compound with the major part of your syllables: and 
 though I must be content to bear with those that say 
 you are reverend grave men, yet they lie deadly that 
 tell you you have good faces. If you see this in 
 the map of my microcosm, follows it that I am known 
 well enough too? what barm can your bisson 
 conspectuities glean out of this character, if I be 
 known well enough too? 
 BRUTUS  Come, sir, come, we know you well enough. 
 MENENIUS  You know neither me, yourselves nor any thing. You 
 are ambitious for poor knaves' caps and legs: you 
 wear out a good wholesome forenoon in hearing a 
 cause between an orange wife and a fosset-seller; 
 and then rejourn the controversy of three pence to a 
 second day of audience. When you are hearing a 
 matter between party and party, if you chance to be 
 pinched with the colic, you make faces like 
 mummers; set up the bloody flag against all 
 patience; and, in roaring for a chamber-pot, 
 dismiss the controversy bleeding the more entangled 
 by your hearing: all the peace you make in their 
 cause is, calling both the parties knaves. You are 
 a pair of strange ones. 
 BRUTUS  Come, come, you are well understood to be a 
 perfecter giber for the table than a necessary 
 bencher in the Capitol. 
 MENENIUS  Our very priests must become mockers, if they shall 
 encounter such ridiculous subjects as you are. When 
 you speak best unto the purpose, it is not worth the 
 wagging of your beards; and your beards deserve not 
 so honourable a grave as to stuff a botcher's 
 cushion, or to be entombed in an ass's pack- 
 saddle. Yet you must be saying, Marcius is proud; 
 who in a cheap estimation, is worth predecessors 
 since Deucalion, though peradventure some of the 
 best of 'em were hereditary hangmen. God-den to 
 your worships: more of your conversation would 
 infect my brain, being the herdsmen of the beastly 
 plebeians: I will be bold to take my leave of you. 

 BRUTUS and SICINIUS go aside 
 Enter VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA, and VALERIA  How now, my as fair as noble ladies,--and the moon, 
 were she earthly, no nobler,--whither do you follow 
 your eyes so fast? 
 VOLUMNIA  Honourable Menenius, my boy Marcius approaches; for 
 the love of Juno, let's go. 
 MENENIUS  Ha! Marcius coming home! 
 VOLUMNIA  Ay, worthy Menenius; and with most prosperous 
 approbation. 
 MENENIUS  Take my cap, Jupiter, and I thank thee. Hoo! 
 Marcius coming home! 
 VOLUMNIA  VIRGILIA  Nay,'tis true. 
 VOLUMNIA  Look, here's a letter from him: the state hath 
 another, his wife another; and, I think, there's one 
 at home for you. 
 MENENIUS  I will make my very house reel tonight: a letter for 
 me! 
 VIRGILIA  Yes, certain, there's a letter for you; I saw't. 
 MENENIUS  A letter for me! it gives me an estate of seven 
 years' health; in which time I will make a lip at 
 the physician: the most sovereign prescription in 
 Galen is but empiricutic, and, to this preservative, 
 of no better report than a horse-drench. Is he 
 not wounded? he was wont to come home wounded. 
 VIRGILIA  O, no, no, no. 
 VOLUMNIA  O, he is wounded; I thank the gods for't. 
 MENENIUS  So do I too, if it be not too much: brings a' 
 victory in his pocket? the wounds become him. 
 VOLUMNIA  On's brows: Menenius, he comes the third time home 
 with the oaken garland. 
 MENENIUS  Has he disciplined Aufidius soundly? 
 VOLUMNIA  Titus Lartius writes, they fought together, but 
 Aufidius got off. 
 MENENIUS  And 'twas time for him too, I'll warrant him that: 
 an he had stayed by him, I would not have been so 
 fidiused for all the chests in Corioli, and the gold 
 that's in them. Is the senate possessed of this? 
 VOLUMNIA  Good ladies, let's go. Yes, yes, yes; the senate 
 has letters from the general, wherein he gives my 
 son the whole name of the war: he hath in this 
 action outdone his former deeds doubly 
 VALERIA  In troth, there's wondrous things spoke of him. 
 MENENIUS  Wondrous! ay, I warrant you, and not without his 
 true purchasing. 
 VIRGILIA  The gods grant them true! 
 VOLUMNIA  True! pow, wow. 
 MENENIUS  True! I'll be sworn they are true. 
 Where is he wounded? 

 To the Tribunes  God save your good worships! Marcius is coming 
 home: he has more cause to be proud. Where is he wounded? 
 VOLUMNIA  I' the shoulder and i' the left arm there will be 
 large cicatrices to show the people, when he shall 
 stand for his place. He received in the repulse of 
 Tarquin seven hurts i' the body. 
 MENENIUS  One i' the neck, and two i' the thigh,--there's 
 nine that I know. 
 VOLUMNIA  He had, before this last expedition, twenty-five 
 wounds upon him. 
 MENENIUS  Now it's twenty-seven: every gash was an enemy's grave. 

 A shout and flourish  Hark! the trumpets. 
 VOLUMNIA  These are the ushers of Marcius: before him he 
 carries noise, and behind him he leaves tears: 
 Death, that dark spirit, in 's nervy arm doth lie; 
 Which, being advanced, declines, and then men die. 

 A sennet. Trumpets sound. Enter COMINIUS the  general, and TITUS LARTIUS; between them, CORIOLANUS,  crowned with an oaken garland; with Captains and Soldiers, and a Herald  Herald  Know, Rome, that all alone Marcius did fight 
 Within Corioli gates: where he hath won, 
 With fame, a name to Caius Marcius; these 
 In honour follows Coriolanus. 
 Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus! 

 Flourish  All  Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus! 
 CORIOLANUS  No more of this; it does offend my heart: 
 Pray now, no more. 
 COMINIUS  Look, sir, your mother! 
 CORIOLANUS  O, 
 You have, I know, petition'd all the gods 
 For my prosperity! 

 Kneels  VOLUMNIA  Nay, my good soldier, up; 
 My gentle Marcius, worthy Caius, and 
 By deed-achieving honour newly named,-- 
 What is it?--Coriolanus must I call thee?-- 
 But O, thy wife! 
 CORIOLANUS  My gracious silence, hail! 
 Wouldst thou have laugh'd had I come coffin'd home, 
 That weep'st to see me triumph? Ay, my dear, 
 Such eyes the widows in Corioli wear, 
 And mothers that lack sons. 
 MENENIUS  Now, the gods crown thee! 
 CORIOLANUS  And live you yet? 

 To VALERIA  O my sweet lady, pardon. 
 VOLUMNIA  I know not where to turn: O, welcome home: 
 And welcome, general: and ye're welcome all. 
 MENENIUS  A hundred thousand welcomes. I could weep 
 And I could laugh, I am light and heavy. Welcome. 
 A curse begin at very root on's heart, 
 That is not glad to see thee! You are three 
 That Rome should dote on: yet, by the faith of men, 
 We have some old crab-trees here 
 at home that will not 
 Be grafted to your relish. Yet welcome, warriors: 
 We call a nettle but a nettle and 
 The faults of fools but folly. 
 COMINIUS  Ever right. 
 CORIOLANUS  Menenius ever, ever. 
 Herald  Give way there, and go on! 
 CORIOLANUS  [To VOLUMNIA and VIRGILIA]  Your hand, and yours: 
 Ere in our own house I do shade my head, 
 The good patricians must be visited; 
 From whom I have received not only greetings, 
 But with them change of honours. 
 VOLUMNIA  I have lived 
 To see inherited my very wishes 
 And the buildings of my fancy: only 
 There's one thing wanting, which I doubt not but 
 Our Rome will cast upon thee. 
 CORIOLANUS  Know, good mother, 
 I had rather be their servant in my way, 
 Than sway with them in theirs. 
 COMINIUS  On, to the Capitol! 

 Flourish. Cornets. Exeunt in state, as before. BRUTUS and SICINIUS come forward  BRUTUS  All tongues speak of him, and the bleared sights 
 Are spectacled to see him: your prattling nurse 
 Into a rapture lets her baby cry 
 While she chats him: the kitchen malkin pins 
 Her richest lockram 'bout her reechy neck, 
 Clambering the walls to eye him: stalls, bulks, windows, 
 Are smother'd up, leads fill'd, and ridges horsed 
 With variable complexions, all agreeing 
 In earnestness to see him: seld-shown flamens 
 Do press among the popular throngs and puff 
 To win a vulgar station: or veil'd dames 
 Commit the war of white and damask in 
 Their nicely-gawded cheeks to the wanton spoil 
 Of Phoebus' burning kisses: such a pother 
 As if that whatsoever god who leads him 
 Were slily crept into his human powers 
 And gave him graceful posture. 
 SICINIUS  On the sudden, 
 I warrant him consul. 
 BRUTUS  Then our office may, 
 During his power, go sleep. 
 SICINIUS  He cannot temperately transport his honours 
 From where he should begin and end, but will 
 Lose those he hath won. 
 BRUTUS  In that there's comfort. 
 SICINIUS  Doubt not 
 The commoners, for whom we stand, but they 
 Upon their ancient malice will forget 
 With the least cause these his new honours, which 
 That he will give them make I as little question 
 As he is proud to do't. 
 BRUTUS  I heard him swear, 
 Were he to stand for consul, never would he 
 Appear i' the market-place nor on him put 
 The napless vesture of humility; 
 Nor showing, as the manner is, his wounds 
 To the people, beg their stinking breaths. 
 SICINIUS  'Tis right. 
 BRUTUS  It was his word: O, he would miss it rather 
 Than carry it but by the suit of the gentry to him, 
 And the desire of the nobles. 
 SICINIUS  I wish no better 
 Than have him hold that purpose and to put it 
 In execution. 
 BRUTUS  'Tis most like he will. 
 SICINIUS  It shall be to him then as our good wills, 
 A sure destruction. 
 BRUTUS  So it must fall out 
 To him or our authorities. For an end, 
 We must suggest the people in what hatred 
 He still hath held them; that to's power he would 
 Have made them mules, silenced their pleaders and 
 Dispropertied their freedoms, holding them, 
 In human action and capacity, 
 Of no more soul nor fitness for the world 
 Than camels in the war, who have their provand 
 Only for bearing burdens, and sore blows 
 For sinking under them. 
 SICINIUS  This, as you say, suggested 
 At some time when his soaring insolence 
 Shall touch the people--which time shall not want, 
 If he be put upon 't; and that's as easy 
 As to set dogs on sheep--will be his fire 
 To kindle their dry stubble; and their blaze 
 Shall darken him for ever. 

 Enter a Messenger  BRUTUS  What's the matter? 
 Messenger  You are sent for to the Capitol. 'Tis thought 
 That Marcius shall be consul: 
 I have seen the dumb men throng to see him and 
 The blind to bear him speak: matrons flung gloves, 
 Ladies and maids their scarfs and handkerchers, 
 Upon him as he pass'd: the nobles bended, 
 As to Jove's statue, and the commons made 
 A shower and thunder with their caps and shouts: 
 I never saw the like. 
 BRUTUS  Let's to the Capitol; 
 And carry with us ears and eyes for the time, 
 But hearts for the event. 
 SICINIUS  Have with you. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Coriolanus  | Act 2, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 