SCENE IV. A British prison. Cymbeline  Shakespeare homepage  |  Cymbeline  | Act 5, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE IV. A British prison. 
 Enter POSTHUMUS LEONATUS and two Gaolers  First Gaoler  You shall not now be stol'n, you have locks upon you; 
 So graze as you find pasture. 
 Second Gaoler  Ay, or a stomach. 

 Exeunt Gaolers  POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  Most welcome, bondage! for thou art away, 
 think, to liberty: yet am I better 
 Than one that's sick o' the gout; since he had rather 
 Groan so in perpetuity than be cured 
 By the sure physician, death, who is the key 
 To unbar these locks. My conscience, thou art fetter'd 
 More than my shanks and wrists: you good gods, give me 
 The penitent instrument to pick that bolt, 
 Then, free for ever! Is't enough I am sorry? 
 So children temporal fathers do appease; 
 Gods are more full of mercy. Must I repent? 
 I cannot do it better than in gyves, 
 Desired more than constrain'd: to satisfy, 
 If of my freedom 'tis the main part, take 
 No stricter render of me than my all. 
 I know you are more clement than vile men, 
 Who of their broken debtors take a third, 
 A sixth, a tenth, letting them thrive again 
 On their abatement: that's not my desire: 
 For Imogen's dear life take mine; and though 
 'Tis not so dear, yet 'tis a life; you coin'd it: 
 'Tween man and man they weigh not every stamp; 
 Though light, take pieces for the figure's sake: 
 You rather mine, being yours: and so, great powers, 
 If you will take this audit, take this life, 
 And cancel these cold bonds. O Imogen! 
 I'll speak to thee in silence. 

 Sleeps 
 Solemn music. Enter, as in an apparition,  SICILIUS LEONATUS, father to Posthumus Leonatus,  an old man, attired like a warrior; leading in  his hand an ancient matron, his wife, and mother  to Posthumus Leonatus, with music before them:  then, after other music, follow the two young  Leonati, brothers to Posthumus Leonatus, with  wounds as they died in the wars. They circle Posthumus Leonatus round, as he lies sleeping  Sicilius Leonatus  No more, thou thunder-master, show 
 Thy spite on mortal flies: 
 With Mars fall out, with Juno chide, 
 That thy adulteries 
 Rates and revenges. 
 Hath my poor boy done aught but well, 
 Whose face I never saw? 
 I died whilst in the womb he stay'd 
 Attending nature's law: 
 Whose father then, as men report 
 Thou orphans' father art, 
 Thou shouldst have been, and shielded him 
 From this earth-vexing smart. 
 Mother  Lucina lent not me her aid, 
 But took me in my throes; 
 That from me was Posthumus ript, 
 Came crying 'mongst his foes, 
 A thing of pity! 
 Sicilius Leonatus  Great nature, like his ancestry, 
 Moulded the stuff so fair, 
 That he deserved the praise o' the world, 
 As great Sicilius' heir. 
 First Brother  When once he was mature for man, 
 In Britain where was he 
 That could stand up his parallel; 
 Or fruitful object be 
 In eye of Imogen, that best 
 Could deem his dignity? 
 Mother  With marriage wherefore was he mock'd, 
 To be exiled, and thrown 
 From Leonati seat, and cast 
 From her his dearest one, 
 Sweet Imogen? 
 Sicilius Leonatus  Why did you suffer Iachimo, 
 Slight thing of Italy, 
 To taint his nobler heart and brain 
 With needless jealosy; 
 And to become the geck and scorn 
 O' th' other's villany? 
 Second Brother  For this from stiller seats we came, 
 Our parents and us twain, 
 That striking in our country's cause 
 Fell bravely and were slain, 
 Our fealty and Tenantius' right 
 With honour to maintain. 
 First Brother  Like hardiment Posthumus hath 
 To Cymbeline perform'd: 
 Then, Jupiter, thou king of gods, 
 Why hast thou thus adjourn'd 
 The graces for his merits due, 
 Being all to dolours turn'd? 
 Sicilius Leonatus  Thy crystal window ope; look out; 
 No longer exercise 
 Upon a valiant race thy harsh 
 And potent injuries. 
 Mother  Since, Jupiter, our son is good, 
 Take off his miseries. 
 Sicilius Leonatus  Peep through thy marble mansion; help; 
 Or we poor ghosts will cry 
 To the shining synod of the rest 
 Against thy deity. 
 First Brother  Second Brother  Help, Jupiter; or we appeal, 
 And from thy justice fly. 

 Jupiter descends in thunder and lightning, sitting  upon an eagle: he throws a thunderbolt. The Apparitions fall on their knees  Jupiter  No more, you petty spirits of region low, 
 Offend our hearing; hush! How dare you ghosts 
 Accuse the thunderer, whose bolt, you know, 
 Sky-planted batters all rebelling coasts? 
 Poor shadows of Elysium, hence, and rest 
 Upon your never-withering banks of flowers: 
 Be not with mortal accidents opprest; 
 No care of yours it is; you know 'tis ours. 
 Whom best I love I cross; to make my gift, 
 The more delay'd, delighted. Be content; 
 Your low-laid son our godhead will uplift: 
 His comforts thrive, his trials well are spent. 
 Our Jovial star reign'd at his birth, and in 
 Our temple was he married. Rise, and fade. 
 He shall be lord of lady Imogen, 
 And happier much by his affliction made. 
 This tablet lay upon his breast, wherein 
 Our pleasure his full fortune doth confine: 
 and so, away: no further with your din 
 Express impatience, lest you stir up mine. 
 Mount, eagle, to my palace crystalline. 

 Ascends  Sicilius Leonatus  He came in thunder; his celestial breath 
 Was sulphurous to smell: the holy eagle 
 Stoop'd as to foot us: his ascension is 
 More sweet than our blest fields: his royal bird 
 Prunes the immortal wing and cloys his beak, 
 As when his god is pleased. 
 All  Thanks, Jupiter! 
 Sicilius Leonatus  The marble pavement closes, he is enter'd 
 His radiant root. Away! and, to be blest, 
 Let us with care perform his great behest. 

 The Apparitions vanish  Posthumus Leonatus  [Waking]  Sleep, thou hast been a grandsire, and begot 
 A father to me; and thou hast created 
 A mother and two brothers: but, O scorn! 
 Gone! they went hence so soon as they were born: 
 And so I am awake. Poor wretches that depend 
 On greatness' favour dream as I have done, 
 Wake and find nothing. But, alas, I swerve: 
 Many dream not to find, neither deserve, 
 And yet are steep'd in favours: so am I, 
 That have this golden chance and know not why. 
 What fairies haunt this ground? A book? O rare one! 
 Be not, as is our fangled world, a garment 
 Nobler than that it covers: let thy effects 
 So follow, to be most unlike our courtiers, 
 As good as promise. 

 Reads  'When as a lion's whelp shall, to himself unknown, 
 without seeking find, and be embraced by a piece of 
 tender air; and when from a stately cedar shall be 
 lopped branches, which, being dead many years, 
 shall after revive, be jointed to the old stock and 
 freshly grow; then shall Posthumus end his miseries, 
 Britain be fortunate and flourish in peace and plenty.' 
 'Tis still a dream, or else such stuff as madmen 
 Tongue and brain not; either both or nothing; 
 Or senseless speaking or a speaking such 
 As sense cannot untie. Be what it is, 
 The action of my life is like it, which 
 I'll keep, if but for sympathy. 

 Re-enter First Gaoler  First Gaoler  Come, sir, are you ready for death? 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  Over-roasted rather; ready long ago. 
 First Gaoler  Hanging is the word, sir: if 
 you be ready for that, you are well cooked. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  So, if I prove a good repast to the 
 spectators, the dish pays the shot. 
 First Gaoler  A heavy reckoning for you, sir. But the comfort is, 
 you shall be called to no more payments, fear no 
 more tavern-bills; which are often the sadness of 
 parting, as the procuring of mirth: you come in 
 flint for want of meat, depart reeling with too 
 much drink; sorry that you have paid too much, and 
 sorry that you are paid too much; purse and brain 
 both empty; the brain the heavier for being too 
 light, the purse too light, being drawn of 
 heaviness: of this contradiction you shall now be 
 quit. O, the charity of a penny cord! It sums up 
 thousands in a trice: you have no true debitor and 
 creditor but it; of what's past, is, and to come, 
 the discharge: your neck, sir, is pen, book and 
 counters; so the acquittance follows. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  I am merrier to die than thou art to live. 
 First Gaoler  Indeed, sir, he that sleeps feels not the 
 tooth-ache: but a man that were to sleep your 
 sleep, and a hangman to help him to bed, I think he 
 would change places with his officer; for, look you, 
 sir, you know not which way you shall go. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  Yes, indeed do I, fellow. 
 First Gaoler  Your death has eyes in 's head then; I have not seen 
 him so pictured: you must either be directed by 
 some that take upon them to know, or do take upon 
 yourself that which I am sure you do not know, or 
 jump the after inquiry on your own peril: and how 
 you shall speed in your journey's end, I think you'll 
 never return to tell one. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  I tell thee, fellow, there are none want eyes to 
 direct them the way I am going, but such as wink and 
 will not use them. 
 First Gaoler  What an infinite mock is this, that a man should 
 have the best use of eyes to see the way of 
 blindness! I am sure hanging's the way of winking. 

 Enter a Messenger  Messenger  Knock off his manacles; bring your prisoner to the king. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  Thou bring'st good news; I am called to be made free. 
 First Gaoler  I'll be hang'd then. 
 POSTHUMUS LEONATUS  Thou shalt be then freer than a gaoler; no bolts for the dead. 

 Exeunt POSTHUMUS LEONATUS and Messenger  First Gaoler  Unless a man would marry a gallows and beget young 
 gibbets, I never saw one so prone. Yet, on my 
 conscience, there are verier knaves desire to live, 
 for all he be a Roman: and there be some of them 
 too that die against their wills; so should I, if I 
 were one. I would we were all of one mind, and one 
 mind good; O, there were desolation of gaolers and 
 gallowses! I speak against my present profit, but 
 my wish hath a preferment in 't. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Cymbeline  | Act 5, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 