SCENE II. The same. The council-chamber. The Life of King Henry the Eighth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VIII  | Act 1, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. The same. The council-chamber. 
 Cornets. Enter KING HENRY VIII, leaning on  CARDINAL WOLSEY's shoulder, the Nobles, and LOVELL;  CARDINAL WOLSEY places himself under KING HENRY VIII's feet on his right side  KING HENRY VIII  My life itself, and the best heart of it, 
 Thanks you for this great care: I stood i' the level 
 Of a full-charged confederacy, and give thanks 
 To you that choked it. Let be call'd before us 
 That gentleman of Buckingham's; in person 
 I'll hear him his confessions justify; 
 And point by point the treasons of his master 
 He shall again relate. 

 A noise within, crying 'Room for the Queen!' Enter  QUEEN KATHARINE, ushered by NORFOLK, and SUFFOLK:  she kneels. KING HENRY VIII riseth from his state, takes her up, kisses and placeth her by him  QUEEN KATHARINE  Nay, we must longer kneel: I am a suitor. 
 KING HENRY VIII  Arise, and take place by us: half your suit 
 Never name to us; you have half our power: 
 The other moiety, ere you ask, is given; 
 Repeat your will and take it. 
 QUEEN KATHARINE  Thank your majesty. 
 That you would love yourself, and in that love 
 Not unconsider'd leave your honour, nor 
 The dignity of your office, is the point 
 Of my petition. 
 KING HENRY VIII  Lady mine, proceed. 
 QUEEN KATHARINE  I am solicited, not by a few, 
 And those of true condition, that your subjects 
 Are in great grievance: there have been commissions 
 Sent down among 'em, which hath flaw'd the heart 
 Of all their loyalties: wherein, although, 
 My good lord cardinal, they vent reproaches 
 Most bitterly on you, as putter on 
 Of these exactions, yet the king our master-- 
 Whose honour heaven shield from soil!--even he 
 escapes not 
 Language unmannerly, yea, such which breaks 
 The sides of loyalty, and almost appears 
 In loud rebellion. 
 NORFOLK  Not almost appears, 
 It doth appear; for, upon these taxations, 
 The clothiers all, not able to maintain 
 The many to them longing, have put off 
 The spinsters, carders, fullers, weavers, who, 
 Unfit for other life, compell'd by hunger 
 And lack of other means, in desperate manner 
 Daring the event to the teeth, are all in uproar, 
 And danger serves among then! 
 KING HENRY VIII  Taxation! 
 Wherein? and what taxation? My lord cardinal, 
 You that are blamed for it alike with us, 
 Know you of this taxation? 
 CARDINAL WOLSEY  Please you, sir, 
 I know but of a single part, in aught 
 Pertains to the state; and front but in that file 
 Where others tell steps with me. 
 QUEEN KATHARINE  No, my lord, 
 You know no more than others; but you frame 
 Things that are known alike; which are not wholesome 
 To those which would not know them, and yet must 
 Perforce be their acquaintance. These exactions, 
 Whereof my sovereign would have note, they are 
 Most pestilent to the bearing; and, to bear 'em, 
 The back is sacrifice to the load. They say 
 They are devised by you; or else you suffer 
 Too hard an exclamation. 
 KING HENRY VIII  Still exaction! 
 The nature of it? in what kind, let's know, 
 Is this exaction? 
 QUEEN KATHARINE  I am much too venturous 
 In tempting of your patience; but am bolden'd 
 Under your promised pardon. The subjects' grief 
 Comes through commissions, which compel from each 
 The sixth part of his substance, to be levied 
 Without delay; and the pretence for this 
 Is named, your wars in France: this makes bold mouths: 
 Tongues spit their duties out, and cold hearts freeze 
 Allegiance in them; their curses now 
 Live where their prayers did: and it's come to pass, 
 This tractable obedience is a slave 
 To each incensed will. I would your highness 
 Would give it quick consideration, for 
 There is no primer business. 
 KING HENRY VIII  By my life, 
 This is against our pleasure. 
 CARDINAL WOLSEY  And for me, 
 I have no further gone in this than by 
 A single voice; and that not pass'd me but 
 By learned approbation of the judges. If I am 
 Traduced by ignorant tongues, which neither know 
 My faculties nor person, yet will be 
 The chronicles of my doing, let me say 
 'Tis but the fate of place, and the rough brake 
 That virtue must go through. We must not stint 
 Our necessary actions, in the fear 
 To cope malicious censurers; which ever, 
 As ravenous fishes, do a vessel follow 
 That is new-trimm'd, but benefit no further 
 Than vainly longing. What we oft do best, 
 By sick interpreters, once weak ones, is 
 Not ours, or not allow'd; what worst, as oft, 
 Hitting a grosser quality, is cried up 
 For our best act. If we shall stand still, 
 In fear our motion will be mock'd or carp'd at, 
 We should take root here where we sit, or sit 
 State-statues only. 
 KING HENRY VIII  Things done well, 
 And with a care, exempt themselves from fear; 
 Things done without example, in their issue 
 Are to be fear'd. Have you a precedent 
 Of this commission? I believe, not any. 
 We must not rend our subjects from our laws, 
 And stick them in our will. Sixth part of each? 
 A trembling contribution! Why, we take 
 From every tree lop, bark, and part o' the timber; 
 And, though we leave it with a root, thus hack'd, 
 The air will drink the sap. To every county 
 Where this is question'd send our letters, with 
 Free pardon to each man that has denied 
 The force of this commission: pray, look to't; 
 I put it to your care. 
 CARDINAL WOLSEY  A word with you. 

 To the Secretary  Let there be letters writ to every shire, 
 Of the king's grace and pardon. The grieved commons 
 Hardly conceive of me; let it be noised 
 That through our intercession this revokement 
 And pardon comes: I shall anon advise you 
 Further in the proceeding. 

 Exit Secretary 
 Enter Surveyor  QUEEN KATHARINE  I am sorry that the Duke of Buckingham 
 Is run in your displeasure. 
 KING HENRY VIII  It grieves many: 
 The gentleman is learn'd, and a most rare speaker; 
 To nature none more bound; his training such, 
 That he may furnish and instruct great teachers, 
 And never seek for aid out of himself. Yet see, 
 When these so noble benefits shall prove 
 Not well disposed, the mind growing once corrupt, 
 They turn to vicious forms, ten times more ugly 
 Than ever they were fair. This man so complete, 
 Who was enroll'd 'mongst wonders, and when we, 
 Almost with ravish'd listening, could not find 
 His hour of speech a minute; he, my lady, 
 Hath into monstrous habits put the graces 
 That once were his, and is become as black 
 As if besmear'd in hell. Sit by us; you shall hear-- 
 This was his gentleman in trust--of him 
 Things to strike honour sad. Bid him recount 
 The fore-recited practises; whereof 
 We cannot feel too little, hear too much. 
 CARDINAL WOLSEY  Stand forth, and with bold spirit relate what you, 
 Most like a careful subject, have collected 
 Out of the Duke of Buckingham. 
 KING HENRY VIII  Speak freely. 
 Surveyor  First, it was usual with him, every day 
 It would infect his speech, that if the king 
 Should without issue die, he'll carry it so 
 To make the sceptre his: these very words 
 I've heard him utter to his son-in-law, 
 Lord Abergavenny; to whom by oath he menaced 
 Revenge upon the cardinal. 
 CARDINAL WOLSEY  Please your highness, note 
 This dangerous conception in this point. 
 Not friended by by his wish, to your high person 
 His will is most malignant; and it stretches 
 Beyond you, to your friends. 
 QUEEN KATHARINE  My learn'd lord cardinal, 
 Deliver all with charity. 
 KING HENRY VIII  Speak on: 
 How grounded he his title to the crown, 
 Upon our fail? to this point hast thou heard him 
 At any time speak aught? 
 Surveyor  He was brought to this 
 By a vain prophecy of Nicholas Hopkins. 
 KING HENRY VIII  What was that Hopkins? 
 Surveyor  Sir, a Chartreux friar, 
 His confessor, who fed him every minute 
 With words of sovereignty. 
 KING HENRY VIII  How know'st thou this? 
 Surveyor  Not long before your highness sped to France, 
 The duke being at the Rose, within the parish 
 Saint Lawrence Poultney, did of me demand 
 What was the speech among the Londoners 
 Concerning the French journey: I replied, 
 Men fear'd the French would prove perfidious, 
 To the king's danger. Presently the duke 
 Said, 'twas the fear, indeed; and that he doubted 
 'Twould prove the verity of certain words 
 Spoke by a holy monk; 'that oft,' says he, 
 'Hath sent to me, wishing me to permit 
 John de la Car, my chaplain, a choice hour 
 To hear from him a matter of some moment: 
 Whom after under the confession's seal 
 He solemnly had sworn, that what he spoke 
 My chaplain to no creature living, but 
 To me, should utter, with demure confidence 
 This pausingly ensued: neither the king nor's heirs, 
 Tell you the duke, shall prosper: bid him strive 
 To gain the love o' the commonalty: the duke 
 Shall govern England.' 
 QUEEN KATHARINE  If I know you well, 
 You were the duke's surveyor, and lost your office 
 On the complaint o' the tenants: take good heed 
 You charge not in your spleen a noble person 
 And spoil your nobler soul: I say, take heed; 
 Yes, heartily beseech you. 
 KING HENRY VIII  Let him on. 
 Go forward. 
 Surveyor  On my soul, I'll speak but truth. 
 I told my lord the duke, by the devil's illusions 
 The monk might be deceived; and that 'twas dangerous for him 
 To ruminate on this so far, until 
 It forged him some design, which, being believed, 
 It was much like to do: he answer'd, 'Tush, 
 It can do me no damage;' adding further, 
 That, had the king in his last sickness fail'd, 
 The cardinal's and Sir Thomas Lovell's heads 
 Should have gone off. 
 KING HENRY VIII  Ha! what, so rank? Ah ha! 
 There's mischief in this man: canst thou say further? 
 Surveyor  I can, my liege. 
 KING HENRY VIII  Proceed. 
 Surveyor  Being at Greenwich, 
 After your highness had reproved the duke 
 About Sir William Blomer,-- 
 KING HENRY VIII  I remember 
 Of such a time: being my sworn servant, 
 The duke retain'd him his. But on; what hence? 
 Surveyor  'If,' quoth he, 'I for this had been committed, 
 As, to the Tower, I thought, I would have play'd 
 The part my father meant to act upon 
 The usurper Richard; who, being at Salisbury, 
 Made suit to come in's presence; which if granted, 
 As he made semblance of his duty, would 
 Have put his knife to him.' 
 KING HENRY VIII  A giant traitor! 
 CARDINAL WOLSEY  Now, madam, may his highness live in freedom, 
 and this man out of prison? 
 QUEEN KATHARINE  God mend all! 
 KING HENRY VIII  There's something more would out of thee; what say'st? 
 Surveyor  After 'the duke his father,' with 'the knife,' 
 He stretch'd him, and, with one hand on his dagger, 
 Another spread on's breast, mounting his eyes 
 He did discharge a horrible oath; whose tenor 
 Was,--were he evil used, he would outgo 
 His father by as much as a performance 
 Does an irresolute purpose. 
 KING HENRY VIII  There's his period, 
 To sheathe his knife in us. He is attach'd; 
 Call him to present trial: if he may 
 Find mercy in the law, 'tis his: if none, 
 Let him not seek 't of us: by day and night, 
 He's traitor to the height. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VIII  | Act 1, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 