SCENE III. An ante-chamber in the palace. The Life of King Henry the Eighth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VIII  | Act 1, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. An ante-chamber in the palace. 
 Enter Chamberlain and SANDS  Chamberlain  Is't possible the spells of France should juggle 
 Men into such strange mysteries? 
 SANDS  New customs, 
 Though they be never so ridiculous, 
 Nay, let 'em be unmanly, yet are follow'd. 
 Chamberlain  As far as I see, all the good our English 
 Have got by the late voyage is but merely 
 A fit or two o' the face; but they are shrewd ones; 
 For when they hold 'em, you would swear directly 
 Their very noses had been counsellors 
 To Pepin or Clotharius, they keep state so. 
 SANDS  They have all new legs, and lame ones: one would take it, 
 That never saw 'em pace before, the spavin 
 Or springhalt reign'd among 'em. 
 Chamberlain  Death! my lord, 
 Their clothes are after such a pagan cut too, 
 That, sure, they've worn out Christendom. 

 Enter LOVELL  How now! 
 What news, Sir Thomas Lovell? 
 LOVELL  Faith, my lord, 
 I hear of none, but the new proclamation 
 That's clapp'd upon the court-gate. 
 Chamberlain  What is't for? 
 LOVELL  The reformation of our travell'd gallants, 
 That fill the court with quarrels, talk, and tailors. 
 Chamberlain  I'm glad 'tis there: now I would pray our monsieurs 
 To think an English courtier may be wise, 
 And never see the Louvre. 
 LOVELL  They must either, 
 For so run the conditions, leave those remnants 
 Of fool and feather that they got in France, 
 With all their honourable point of ignorance 
 Pertaining thereunto, as fights and fireworks, 
 Abusing better men than they can be, 
 Out of a foreign wisdom, renouncing clean 
 The faith they have in tennis, and tall stockings, 
 Short blister'd breeches, and those types of travel, 
 And understand again like honest men; 
 Or pack to their old playfellows: there, I take it, 
 They may, 'cum privilegio,' wear away 
 The lag end of their lewdness and be laugh'd at. 
 SANDS  'Tis time to give 'em physic, their diseases 
 Are grown so catching. 
 Chamberlain  What a loss our ladies 
 Will have of these trim vanities! 
 LOVELL  Ay, marry, 
 There will be woe indeed, lords: the sly whoresons 
 Have got a speeding trick to lay down ladies; 
 A French song and a fiddle has no fellow. 
 SANDS  The devil fiddle 'em! I am glad they are going, 
 For, sure, there's no converting of 'em: now 
 An honest country lord, as I am, beaten 
 A long time out of play, may bring his plainsong 
 And have an hour of hearing; and, by'r lady, 
 Held current music too. 
 Chamberlain  Well said, Lord Sands; 
 Your colt's tooth is not cast yet. 
 SANDS  No, my lord; 
 Nor shall not, while I have a stump. 
 Chamberlain  Sir Thomas, 
 Whither were you a-going? 
 LOVELL  To the cardinal's: 
 Your lordship is a guest too. 
 Chamberlain  O, 'tis true: 
 This night he makes a supper, and a great one, 
 To many lords and ladies; there will be 
 The beauty of this kingdom, I'll assure you. 
 LOVELL  That churchman bears a bounteous mind indeed, 
 A hand as fruitful as the land that feeds us; 
 His dews fall every where. 
 Chamberlain  No doubt he's noble; 
 He had a black mouth that said other of him. 
 SANDS  He may, my lord; has wherewithal: in him 
 Sparing would show a worse sin than ill doctrine: 
 Men of his way should be most liberal; 
 They are set here for examples. 
 Chamberlain  True, they are so: 
 But few now give so great ones. My barge stays; 
 Your lordship shall along. Come, good Sir Thomas, 
 We shall be late else; which I would not be, 
 For I was spoke to, with Sir Henry Guildford 
 This night to be comptrollers. 
 SANDS  I am your lordship's. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry VIII  | Act 1, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 