SCENE V. The same. The Life of King Henry the Fifth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry V  | Act 3, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE V. The same. 
 Enter the KING OF FRANCE, the DAUPHIN, the DUKE oF BOURBON, the Constable Of France, and others  KING OF FRANCE  'Tis certain he hath pass'd the river Somme. 
 Constable  And if he be not fought withal, my lord, 
 Let us not live in France; let us quit all 
 And give our vineyards to a barbarous people. 
 DAUPHIN  O Dieu vivant! shall a few sprays of us, 
 The emptying of our fathers' luxury, 
 Our scions, put in wild and savage stock, 
 Spirt up so suddenly into the clouds, 
 And overlook their grafters? 
 BOURBON  Normans, but bastard Normans, Norman bastards! 
 Mort de ma vie! if they march along 
 Unfought withal, but I will sell my dukedom, 
 To buy a slobbery and a dirty farm 
 In that nook-shotten isle of Albion. 
 Constable  Dieu de batailles! where have they this mettle? 
 Is not their climate foggy, raw and dull, 
 On whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale, 
 Killing their fruit with frowns? Can sodden water, 
 A drench for sur-rein'd jades, their barley-broth, 
 Decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat? 
 And shall our quick blood, spirited with wine, 
 Seem frosty? O, for honour of our land, 
 Let us not hang like roping icicles 
 Upon our houses' thatch, whiles a more frosty people 
 Sweat drops of gallant youth in our rich fields! 
 Poor we may call them in their native lords. 
 DAUPHIN  By faith and honour, 
 Our madams mock at us, and plainly say 
 Our mettle is bred out and they will give 
 Their bodies to the lust of English youth 
 To new-store France with bastard warriors. 
 BOURBON  They bid us to the English dancing-schools, 
 And teach lavoltas high and swift corantos; 
 Saying our grace is only in our heels, 
 And that we are most lofty runaways. 
 KING OF FRANCE  Where is Montjoy the herald? speed him hence: 
 Let him greet England with our sharp defiance. 
 Up, princes! and, with spirit of honour edged 
 More sharper than your swords, hie to the field: 
 Charles Delabreth, high constable of France; 
 You Dukes of Orleans, Bourbon, and of Berri, 
 Alencon, Brabant, Bar, and Burgundy; 
 Jaques Chatillon, Rambures, Vaudemont, 
 Beaumont, Grandpre, Roussi, and Fauconberg, 
 Foix, Lestrale, Bouciqualt, and Charolois; 
 High dukes, great princes, barons, lords and knights, 
 For your great seats now quit you of great shames. 
 Bar Harry England, that sweeps through our land 
 With pennons painted in the blood of Harfleur: 
 Rush on his host, as doth the melted snow 
 Upon the valleys, whose low vassal seat 
 The Alps doth spit and void his rheum upon: 
 Go down upon him, you have power enough, 
 And in a captive chariot into Rouen 
 Bring him our prisoner. 
 Constable  This becomes the great. 
 Sorry am I his numbers are so few, 
 His soldiers sick and famish'd in their march, 
 For I am sure, when he shall see our army, 
 He'll drop his heart into the sink of fear 
 And for achievement offer us his ransom. 
 KING OF FRANCE  Therefore, lord constable, haste on Montjoy. 
 And let him say to England that we send 
 To know what willing ransom he will give. 
 Prince Dauphin, you shall stay with us in Rouen. 
 DAUPHIN  Not so, I do beseech your majesty. 
 KING OF FRANCE  Be patient, for you shall remain with us. 
 Now forth, lord constable and princes all, 
 And quickly bring us word of England's fall. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry V  | Act 3, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 