SCENE I. London. A street. The Life of King Henry the Fifth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry V  | Act 2, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. London. A street. 
 Enter Corporal NYM and Lieutenant BARDOLPH  BARDOLPH  Well met, Corporal Nym. 
 NYM  Good morrow, Lieutenant Bardolph. 
 BARDOLPH  What, are Ancient Pistol and you friends yet? 
 NYM  For my part, I care not: I say little; but when 
 time shall serve, there shall be smiles; but that 
 shall be as it may. I dare not fight; but I will 
 wink and hold out mine iron: it is a simple one; but 
 what though? it will toast cheese, and it will 
 endure cold as another man's sword will: and 
 there's an end. 
 BARDOLPH  I will bestow a breakfast to make you friends; and 
 we'll be all three sworn brothers to France: let it 
 be so, good Corporal Nym. 
 NYM  Faith, I will live so long as I may, that's the 
 certain of it; and when I cannot live any longer, I 
 will do as I may: that is my rest, that is the 
 rendezvous of it. 
 BARDOLPH  It is certain, corporal, that he is married to Nell 
 Quickly: and certainly she did you wrong; for you 
 were troth-plight to her. 
 NYM  I cannot tell: things must be as they may: men may 
 sleep, and they may have their throats about them at 
 that time; and some say knives have edges. It must 
 be as it may: though patience be a tired mare, yet 
 she will plod. There must be conclusions. Well, I 
 cannot tell. 

 Enter PISTOL and Hostess  BARDOLPH  Here comes Ancient Pistol and his wife: good 
 corporal, be patient here. How now, mine host Pistol! 
 PISTOL  Base tike, call'st thou me host? Now, by this hand, 
 I swear, I scorn the term; Nor shall my Nell keep lodgers. 
 Hostess  No, by my troth, not long; for we cannot lodge and 
 board a dozen or fourteen gentlewomen that live 
 honestly by the prick of their needles, but it will 
 be thought we keep a bawdy house straight. 

 NYM and PISTOL draw  O well a day, Lady, if he be not drawn now! we 
 shall see wilful adultery and murder committed. 
 BARDOLPH  Good lieutenant! good corporal! offer nothing here. 
 NYM  Pish! 
 PISTOL  Pish for thee, Iceland dog! thou prick-ear'd cur of Iceland! 
 Hostess  Good Corporal Nym, show thy valour, and put up your sword. 
 NYM  Will you shog off? I would have you solus. 
 PISTOL  'Solus,' egregious dog? O viper vile! 
 The 'solus' in thy most mervailous face; 
 The 'solus' in thy teeth, and in thy throat, 
 And in thy hateful lungs, yea, in thy maw, perdy, 
 And, which is worse, within thy nasty mouth! 
 I do retort the 'solus' in thy bowels; 
 For I can take, and Pistol's cock is up, 
 And flashing fire will follow. 
 NYM  I am not Barbason; you cannot conjure me. I have an 
 humour to knock you indifferently well. If you grow 
 foul with me, Pistol, I will scour you with my 
 rapier, as I may, in fair terms: if you would walk 
 off, I would prick your guts a little, in good 
 terms, as I may: and that's the humour of it. 
 PISTOL  O braggart vile and damned furious wight! 
 The grave doth gape, and doting death is near; 
 Therefore exhale. 
 BARDOLPH  Hear me, hear me what I say: he that strikes the 
 first stroke, I'll run him up to the hilts, as I am a soldier. 

 Draws  PISTOL  An oath of mickle might; and fury shall abate. 
 Give me thy fist, thy fore-foot to me give: 
 Thy spirits are most tall. 
 NYM  I will cut thy throat, one time or other, in fair 
 terms: that is the humour of it. 
 PISTOL  'Couple a gorge!' 
 That is the word. I thee defy again. 
 O hound of Crete, think'st thou my spouse to get? 
 No; to the spital go, 
 And from the powdering tub of infamy 
 Fetch forth the lazar kite of Cressid's kind, 
 Doll Tearsheet she by name, and her espouse: 
 I have, and I will hold, the quondam Quickly 
 For the only she; and--pauca, there's enough. Go to. 

 Enter the Boy  Boy  Mine host Pistol, you must come to my master, and 
 you, hostess: he is very sick, and would to bed. 
 Good Bardolph, put thy face between his sheets, and 
 do the office of a warming-pan. Faith, he's very ill. 
 BARDOLPH  Away, you rogue! 
 Hostess  By my troth, he'll yield the crow a pudding one of 
 these days. The king has killed his heart. Good 
 husband, come home presently. 

 Exeunt Hostess and Boy  BARDOLPH  Come, shall I make you two friends? We must to 
 France together: why the devil should we keep 
 knives to cut one another's throats? 
 PISTOL  Let floods o'erswell, and fiends for food howl on! 
 NYM  You'll pay me the eight shillings I won of you at betting? 
 PISTOL  Base is the slave that pays. 
 NYM  That now I will have: that's the humour of it. 
 PISTOL  As manhood shall compound: push home. 

 They draw  BARDOLPH  By this sword, he that makes the first thrust, I'll 
 kill him; by this sword, I will. 
 PISTOL  Sword is an oath, and oaths must have their course. 
 BARDOLPH  Corporal Nym, an thou wilt be friends, be friends: 
 an thou wilt not, why, then, be enemies with me too. 
 Prithee, put up. 
 NYM  I shall have my eight shillings I won of you at betting? 
 PISTOL  A noble shalt thou have, and present pay; 
 And liquor likewise will I give to thee, 
 And friendship shall combine, and brotherhood: 
 I'll live by Nym, and Nym shall live by me; 
 Is not this just? for I shall sutler be 
 Unto the camp, and profits will accrue. 
 Give me thy hand. 
 NYM  I shall have my noble? 
 PISTOL  In cash most justly paid. 
 NYM  Well, then, that's the humour of't. 

 Re-enter Hostess  Hostess  As ever you came of women, come in quickly to Sir 
 John. Ah, poor heart! he is so shaked of a burning 
 quotidian tertian, that it is most lamentable to 
 behold. Sweet men, come to him. 
 NYM  The king hath run bad humours on the knight; that's 
 the even of it. 
 PISTOL  Nym, thou hast spoke the right; 
 His heart is fracted and corroborate. 
 NYM  The king is a good king: but it must be as it may; 
 he passes some humours and careers. 
 PISTOL  Let us condole the knight; for, lambkins we will live. 
 Shakespeare homepage  |  Henry V  | Act 2, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 