SCENE IV. Another part of the same street, before the house of BRUTUS. The Life and Death of Julius Caesar  Shakespeare homepage  |  Julius Caesar  | Act 2, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE IV. Another part of the same street, before the house of BRUTUS. 
 Enter PORTIA and LUCIUS  PORTIA  I prithee, boy, run to the senate-house; 
 Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone: 
 Why dost thou stay? 
 LUCIUS  To know my errand, madam. 
 PORTIA  I would have had thee there, and here again, 
 Ere I can tell thee what thou shouldst do there. 
 O constancy, be strong upon my side, 
 Set a huge mountain 'tween my heart and tongue! 
 I have a man's mind, but a woman's might. 
 How hard it is for women to keep counsel! 
 Art thou here yet? 
 LUCIUS  Madam, what should I do? 
 Run to the Capitol, and nothing else? 
 And so return to you, and nothing else? 
 PORTIA  Yes, bring me word, boy, if thy lord look well, 
 For he went sickly forth: and take good note 
 What Caesar doth, what suitors press to him. 
 Hark, boy! what noise is that? 
 LUCIUS  I hear none, madam. 
 PORTIA  Prithee, listen well; 
 I heard a bustling rumour, like a fray, 
 And the wind brings it from the Capitol. 
 LUCIUS  Sooth, madam, I hear nothing. 

 Enter the Soothsayer  PORTIA  Come hither, fellow: which way hast thou been? 
 Soothsayer  At mine own house, good lady. 
 PORTIA  What is't o'clock? 
 Soothsayer  About the ninth hour, lady. 
 PORTIA  Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitol? 
 Soothsayer  Madam, not yet: I go to take my stand, 
 To see him pass on to the Capitol. 
 PORTIA  Thou hast some suit to Caesar, hast thou not? 
 Soothsayer  That I have, lady: if it will please Caesar 
 To be so good to Caesar as to hear me, 
 I shall beseech him to befriend himself. 
 PORTIA  Why, know'st thou any harm's intended towards him? 
 Soothsayer  None that I know will be, much that I fear may chance. 
 Good morrow to you. Here the street is narrow: 
 The throng that follows Caesar at the heels, 
 Of senators, of praetors, common suitors, 
 Will crowd a feeble man almost to death: 
 I'll get me to a place more void, and there 
 Speak to great Caesar as he comes along. 

 Exit  PORTIA  I must go in. Ay me, how weak a thing 
 The heart of woman is! O Brutus, 
 The heavens speed thee in thine enterprise! 
 Sure, the boy heard me: Brutus hath a suit 
 That Caesar will not grant. O, I grow faint. 
 Run, Lucius, and commend me to my lord; 
 Say I am merry: come to me again, 
 And bring me word what he doth say to thee. 

 Exeunt severally  Shakespeare homepage  |  Julius Caesar  | Act 2, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 