SCENE III. Another part of the field. The Life and Death of Julius Caesar  Shakespeare homepage  |  Julius Caesar  | Act 5, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. Another part of the field. 
 Alarums. Enter CASSIUS and TITINIUS  CASSIUS  O, look, Titinius, look, the villains fly! 
 Myself have to mine own turn'd enemy: 
 This ensign here of mine was turning back; 
 I slew the coward, and did take it from him. 
 TITINIUS  O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early; 
 Who, having some advantage on Octavius, 
 Took it too eagerly: his soldiers fell to spoil, 
 Whilst we by Antony are all enclosed. 

 Enter PINDARUS  PINDARUS  Fly further off, my lord, fly further off; 
 Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord 
 Fly, therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off. 
 CASSIUS  This hill is far enough. Look, look, Titinius; 
 Are those my tents where I perceive the fire? 
 TITINIUS  They are, my lord. 
 CASSIUS  Titinius, if thou lovest me, 
 Mount thou my horse, and hide thy spurs in him, 
 Till he have brought thee up to yonder troops, 
 And here again; that I may rest assured 
 Whether yond troops are friend or enemy. 
 TITINIUS  I will be here again, even with a thought. 

 Exit  CASSIUS  Go, Pindarus, get higher on that hill; 
 My sight was ever thick; regard Titinius, 
 And tell me what thou notest about the field. 

 PINDARUS ascends the hill  This day I breathed first: time is come round, 
 And where I did begin, there shall I end; 
 My life is run his compass. Sirrah, what news? 
 PINDARUS  [Above]  O my lord! 
 CASSIUS  What news? 
 PINDARUS  [Above]  Titinius is enclosed round about 
 With horsemen, that make to him on the spur; 
 Yet he spurs on. Now they are almost on him. 
 Now, Titinius! Now some light. O, he lights too. 
 He's ta'en. 

 Shout  And, hark! they shout for joy. 
 CASSIUS  Come down, behold no more. 
 O, coward that I am, to live so long, 
 To see my best friend ta'en before my face! 

 PINDARUS descends  Come hither, sirrah: 
 In Parthia did I take thee prisoner; 
 And then I swore thee, saving of thy life, 
 That whatsoever I did bid thee do, 
 Thou shouldst attempt it. Come now, keep thine oath; 
 Now be a freeman: and with this good sword, 
 That ran through Caesar's bowels, search this bosom. 
 Stand not to answer: here, take thou the hilts; 
 And, when my face is cover'd, as 'tis now, 
 Guide thou the sword. 

 PINDARUS stabs him  Caesar, thou art revenged, 
 Even with the sword that kill'd thee. 

 Dies  PINDARUS  So, I am free; yet would not so have been, 
 Durst I have done my will. O Cassius, 
 Far from this country Pindarus shall run, 
 Where never Roman shall take note of him. 

 Exit 
 Re-enter TITINIUS with MESSALA  MESSALA  It is but change, Titinius; for Octavius 
 Is overthrown by noble Brutus' power, 
 As Cassius' legions are by Antony. 
 TITINIUS  These tidings will well comfort Cassius. 
 MESSALA  Where did you leave him? 
 TITINIUS  All disconsolate, 
 With Pindarus his bondman, on this hill. 
 MESSALA  Is not that he t hat lies upon the ground? 
 TITINIUS  He lies not like the living. O my heart! 
 MESSALA  Is not that he? 
 TITINIUS  No, this was he, Messala, 
 But Cassius is no more. O setting sun, 
 As in thy red rays thou dost sink to-night, 
 So in his red blood Cassius' day is set; 
 The sun of Rome is set! Our day is gone; 
 Clouds, dews, and dangers come; our deeds are done! 
 Mistrust of my success hath done this deed. 
 MESSALA  Mistrust of good success hath done this deed. 
 O hateful error, melancholy's child, 
 Why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men 
 The things that are not? O error, soon conceived, 
 Thou never comest unto a happy birth, 
 But kill'st the mother that engender'd thee! 
 TITINIUS  What, Pindarus! where art thou, Pindarus? 
 MESSALA  Seek him, Titinius, whilst I go to meet 
 The noble Brutus, thrusting this report 
 Into his ears; I may say, thrusting it; 
 For piercing steel and darts envenomed 
 Shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus 
 As tidings of this sight. 
 TITINIUS  Hie you, Messala, 
 And I will seek for Pindarus the while. 

 Exit MESSALA  Why didst thou send me forth, brave Cassius? 
 Did I not meet thy friends? and did not they 
 Put on my brows this wreath of victory, 
 And bid me give it thee? Didst thou not hear their shouts? 
 Alas, thou hast misconstrued every thing! 
 But, hold thee, take this garland on thy brow; 
 Thy Brutus bid me give it thee, and I 
 Will do his bidding. Brutus, come apace, 
 And see how I regarded Caius Cassius. 
 By your leave, gods:--this is a Roman's part 
 Come, Cassius' sword, and find Titinius' heart. 

 Kills himself 
 Alarum. Re-enter MESSALA, with BRUTUS, CATO, STRATO, VOLUMNIUS, and LUCILIUS  BRUTUS  Where, where, Messala, doth his body lie? 
 MESSALA  Lo, yonder, and Titinius mourning it. 
 BRUTUS  Titinius' face is upward. 
 CATO  He is slain. 
 BRUTUS  O Julius Caesar, thou art mighty yet! 
 Thy spirit walks abroad and turns our swords 
 In our own proper entrails. 

 Low alarums  CATO  Brave Titinius! 
 Look, whether he have not crown'd dead Cassius! 
 BRUTUS  Are yet two Romans living such as these? 
 The last of all the Romans, fare thee well! 
 It is impossible that ever Rome 
 Should breed thy fellow. Friends, I owe more tears 
 To this dead man than you shall see me pay. 
 I shall find time, Cassius, I shall find time. 
 Come, therefore, and to Thasos send his body: 
 His funerals shall not be in our camp, 
 Lest it discomfort us. Lucilius, come; 
 And come, young Cato; let us to the field. 
 Labeo and Flavius, set our battles on: 
 'Tis three o'clock; and, Romans, yet ere night 
 We shall try fortune in a second fight. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Julius Caesar  | Act 5, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 