SCENE I. The British camp, near Dover. King Lear  Shakespeare homepage  |  King Lear  | Act 5, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. The British camp, near Dover. 
 Enter, with drum and colours, EDMUND, REGAN, Gentlemen, and Soldiers.  EDMUND  Know of the duke if his last purpose hold, 
 Or whether since he is advised by aught 
 To change the course: he's full of alteration 
 And self-reproving: bring his constant pleasure. 

 To a Gentleman, who goes out  REGAN  Our sister's man is certainly miscarried. 
 EDMUND  'Tis to be doubted, madam. 
 REGAN  Now, sweet lord, 
 You know the goodness I intend upon you: 
 Tell me--but truly--but then speak the truth, 
 Do you not love my sister? 
 EDMUND  In honour'd love. 
 REGAN  But have you never found my brother's way 
 To the forfended place? 
 EDMUND  That thought abuses you. 
 REGAN  I am doubtful that you have been conjunct 
 And bosom'd with her, as far as we call hers. 
 EDMUND  No, by mine honour, madam. 
 REGAN  I never shall endure her: dear my lord, 
 Be not familiar with her. 
 EDMUND  Fear me not: 
 She and the duke her husband! 

 Enter, with drum and colours, ALBANY, GONERIL, and Soldiers  GONERIL  [Aside]  I had rather lose the battle than that sister 
 Should loosen him and me. 
 ALBANY  Our very loving sister, well be-met. 
 Sir, this I hear; the king is come to his daughter, 
 With others whom the rigor of our state 
 Forced to cry out. Where I could not be honest, 
 I never yet was valiant: for this business, 
 It toucheth us, as France invades our land, 
 Not bolds the king, with others, whom, I fear, 
 Most just and heavy causes make oppose. 
 EDMUND  Sir, you speak nobly. 
 REGAN  Why is this reason'd? 
 GONERIL  Combine together 'gainst the enemy; 
 For these domestic and particular broils 
 Are not the question here. 
 ALBANY  Let's then determine 
 With the ancient of war on our proceedings. 
 EDMUND  I shall attend you presently at your tent. 
 REGAN  Sister, you'll go with us? 
 GONERIL  No. 
 REGAN  'Tis most convenient; pray you, go with us. 
 GONERIL  [Aside]  O, ho, I know the riddle.--I will go. 

 As they are going out, enter EDGAR disguised  EDGAR  If e'er your grace had speech with man so poor, 
 Hear me one word. 
 ALBANY  I'll overtake you. Speak. 

 Exeunt all but ALBANY and EDGAR  EDGAR  Before you fight the battle, ope this letter. 
 If you have victory, let the trumpet sound 
 For him that brought it: wretched though I seem, 
 I can produce a champion that will prove 
 What is avouched there. If you miscarry, 
 Your business of the world hath so an end, 
 And machination ceases. Fortune love you. 
 ALBANY  Stay till I have read the letter. 
 EDGAR  I was forbid it. 
 When time shall serve, let but the herald cry, 
 And I'll appear again. 
 ALBANY  Why, fare thee well: I will o'erlook thy paper. 

 Exit EDGAR 
 Re-enter EDMUND  EDMUND  The enemy's in view; draw up your powers. 
 Here is the guess of their true strength and forces 
 By diligent discovery; but your haste 
 Is now urged on you. 
 ALBANY  We will greet the time. 

 Exit  EDMUND  To both these sisters have I sworn my love; 
 Each jealous of the other, as the stung 
 Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take? 
 Both? one? or neither? Neither can be enjoy'd, 
 If both remain alive: to take the widow 
 Exasperates, makes mad her sister Goneril; 
 And hardly shall I carry out my side, 
 Her husband being alive. Now then we'll use 
 His countenance for the battle; which being done, 
 Let her who would be rid of him devise 
 His speedy taking off. As for the mercy 
 Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia, 
 The battle done, and they within our power, 
 Shall never see his pardon; for my state 
 Stands on me to defend, not to debate. 

 Exit  Shakespeare homepage  |  King Lear  | Act 5, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 