SCENE I. The heath. King Lear  Shakespeare homepage  |  King Lear  | Act 4, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. The heath. 
 Enter EDGAR  EDGAR  Yet better thus, and known to be contemn'd, 
 Than still contemn'd and flatter'd. To be worst, 
 The lowest and most dejected thing of fortune, 
 Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear: 
 The lamentable change is from the best; 
 The worst returns to laughter. Welcome, then, 
 Thou unsubstantial air that I embrace! 
 The wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst 
 Owes nothing to thy blasts. But who comes here? 

 Enter GLOUCESTER, led by an Old Man  My father, poorly led? World, world, O world! 
 But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee, 
 Lie would not yield to age. 
 Old Man  O, my good lord, I have been your tenant, and 
 your father's tenant, these fourscore years. 
 GLOUCESTER  Away, get thee away; good friend, be gone: 
 Thy comforts can do me no good at all; 
 Thee they may hurt. 
 Old Man  Alack, sir, you cannot see your way. 
 GLOUCESTER  I have no way, and therefore want no eyes; 
 I stumbled when I saw: full oft 'tis seen, 
 Our means secure us, and our mere defects 
 Prove our commodities. O dear son Edgar, 
 The food of thy abused father's wrath! 
 Might I but live to see thee in my touch, 
 I'ld say I had eyes again! 
 Old Man  How now! Who's there? 
 EDGAR  [Aside]  O gods! Who is't can say 'I am at 
 the worst'? 
 I am worse than e'er I was. 
 Old Man  'Tis poor mad Tom. 
 EDGAR  [Aside]  And worse I may be yet: the worst is not 
 So long as we can say  'This is the worst.' 
 Old Man  Fellow, where goest? 
 GLOUCESTER  Is it a beggar-man? 
 Old Man  Madman and beggar too. 
 GLOUCESTER  He has some reason, else he could not beg. 
 I' the last night's storm I such a fellow saw; 
 Which made me think a man a worm: my son 
 Came then into my mind; and yet my mind 
 Was then scarce friends with him: I have heard 
 more since. 
 As flies to wanton boys, are we to the gods. 
 They kill us for their sport. 
 EDGAR  [Aside]	How should this be? 
 Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow, 
 Angering itself and others.--Bless thee, master! 
 GLOUCESTER  Is that the naked fellow? 
 Old Man  Ay, my lord. 
 GLOUCESTER  Then, prithee, get thee gone: if, for my sake, 
 Thou wilt o'ertake us, hence a mile or twain, 
 I' the way toward Dover, do it for ancient love; 
 And bring some covering for this naked soul, 
 Who I'll entreat to lead me. 
 Old Man  Alack, sir, he is mad. 
 GLOUCESTER  'Tis the times' plague, when madmen lead the blind. 
 Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure; 
 Above the rest, be gone. 
 Old Man  I'll bring him the best 'parel that I have, 
 Come on't what will. 

 Exit  GLOUCESTER  Sirrah, naked fellow,-- 
 EDGAR  Poor Tom's a-cold. 

 Aside  I cannot daub it further. 
 GLOUCESTER  Come hither, fellow. 
 EDGAR  [Aside]  And yet I must.--Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed. 
 GLOUCESTER  Know'st thou the way to Dover? 
 EDGAR  Both stile and gate, horse-way and foot-path. Poor 
 Tom hath been scared out of his good wits: bless 
 thee, good man's son, from the foul fiend! five 
 fiends have been in poor Tom at once; of lust, as 
 Obidicut; Hobbididence, prince of dumbness; Mahu, of 
 stealing; Modo, of murder; Flibbertigibbet, of 
 mopping and mowing, who since possesses chambermaids 
 and waiting-women. So, bless thee, master! 
 GLOUCESTER  Here, take this purse, thou whom the heavens' plagues 
 Have humbled to all strokes: that I am wretched 
 Makes thee the happier: heavens, deal so still! 
 Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man, 
 That slaves your ordinance, that will not see 
 Because he doth not feel, feel your power quickly; 
 So distribution should undo excess, 
 And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover? 
 EDGAR  Ay, master. 
 GLOUCESTER  There is a cliff, whose high and bending head 
 Looks fearfully in the confined deep: 
 Bring me but to the very brim of it, 
 And I'll repair the misery thou dost bear 
 With something rich about me: from that place 
 I shall no leading need. 
 EDGAR  Give me thy arm: 
 Poor Tom shall lead thee. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  King Lear  | Act 4, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 