SCENE IV. Outside Macbeth's castle. The Tragedy of Macbeth  Shakespeare homepage  |  Macbeth  | Act 2, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE IV. Outside Macbeth's castle. 
 Enter ROSS and an old Man  Old Man  Threescore and ten I can remember well: 
 Within the volume of which time I have seen 
 Hours dreadful and things strange; but this sore night 
 Hath trifled former knowings. 
 ROSS  Ah, good father, 
 Thou seest, the heavens, as troubled with man's act, 
 Threaten his bloody stage: by the clock, 'tis day, 
 And yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp: 
 Is't night's predominance, or the day's shame, 
 That darkness does the face of earth entomb, 
 When living light should kiss it? 
 Old Man  'Tis unnatural, 
 Even like the deed that's done. On Tuesday last, 
 A falcon, towering in her pride of place, 
 Was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd. 
 ROSS  And Duncan's horses--a thing most strange and certain-- 
 Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race, 
 Turn'd wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out, 
 Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would make 
 War with mankind. 
 Old Man  'Tis said they eat each other. 
 ROSS  They did so, to the amazement of mine eyes 
 That look'd upon't. Here comes the good Macduff. 

 Enter MACDUFF  How goes the world, sir, now? 
 MACDUFF  Why, see you not? 
 ROSS  Is't known who did this more than bloody deed? 
 MACDUFF  Those that Macbeth hath slain. 
 ROSS  Alas, the day! 
 What good could they pretend? 
 MACDUFF  They were suborn'd: 
 Malcolm and Donalbain, the king's two sons, 
 Are stol'n away and fled; which puts upon them 
 Suspicion of the deed. 
 ROSS  'Gainst nature still! 
 Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up 
 Thine own life's means! Then 'tis most like 
 The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth. 
 MACDUFF  He is already named, and gone to Scone 
 To be invested. 
 ROSS  Where is Duncan's body? 
 MACDUFF  Carried to Colmekill, 
 The sacred storehouse of his predecessors, 
 And guardian of their bones. 
 ROSS  Will you to Scone? 
 MACDUFF  No, cousin, I'll to Fife. 
 ROSS  Well, I will thither. 
 MACDUFF  Well, may you see things well done there: adieu! 
 Lest our old robes sit easier than our new! 
 ROSS  Farewell, father. 
 Old Man  God's benison go with you; and with those 
 That would make good of bad, and friends of foes! 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Macbeth  | Act 2, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 