SCENE I. An apartment in the DUKE'S palace. Measure for Measure  Shakespeare homepage  |  Measure for Measure  | Act 1, Scene 1 
 Next scene  SCENE I. An apartment in the DUKE'S palace. 
 Enter DUKE VINCENTIO, ESCALUS, Lords and Attendants  DUKE VINCENTIO  Escalus. 
 ESCALUS  My lord. 
 DUKE VINCENTIO  Of government the properties to unfold, 
 Would seem in me to affect speech and discourse; 
 Since I am put to know that your own science 
 Exceeds, in that, the lists of all advice 
 My strength can give you: then no more remains, 
 But that to your sufficiency as your Worth is able, 
 And let them work. The nature of our people, 
 Our city's institutions, and the terms 
 For common justice, you're as pregnant in 
 As art and practise hath enriched any 
 That we remember. There is our commission, 
 From which we would not have you warp. Call hither, 
 I say, bid come before us Angelo. 

 Exit an Attendant  What figure of us think you he will bear? 
 For you must know, we have with special soul 
 Elected him our absence to supply, 
 Lent him our terror, dress'd him with our love, 
 And given his deputation all the organs 
 Of our own power: what think you of it? 
 ESCALUS  If any in Vienna be of worth 
 To undergo such ample grace and honour, 
 It is Lord Angelo. 
 DUKE VINCENTIO  Look where he comes. 

 Enter ANGELO  ANGELO  Always obedient to your grace's will, 
 I come to know your pleasure. 
 DUKE VINCENTIO  Angelo, 
 There is a kind of character in thy life, 
 That to the observer doth thy history 
 Fully unfold. Thyself and thy belongings 
 Are not thine own so proper as to waste 
 Thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee. 
 Heaven doth with us as we with torches do, 
 Not light them for themselves; for if our virtues 
 Did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike 
 As if we had them not. Spirits are not finely touch'd 
 But to fine issues, nor Nature never lends 
 The smallest scruple of her excellence 
 But, like a thrifty goddess, she determines 
 Herself the glory of a creditor, 
 Both thanks and use. But I do bend my speech 
 To one that can my part in him advertise; 
 Hold therefore, Angelo:-- 
 In our remove be thou at full ourself; 
 Mortality and mercy in Vienna 
 Live in thy tongue and heart: old Escalus, 
 Though first in question, is thy secondary. 
 Take thy commission. 
 ANGELO  Now, good my lord, 
 Let there be some more test made of my metal, 
 Before so noble and so great a figure 
 Be stamp'd upon it. 
 DUKE VINCENTIO  No more evasion: 
 We have with a leaven'd and prepared choice 
 Proceeded to you; therefore take your honours. 
 Our haste from hence is of so quick condition 
 That it prefers itself and leaves unquestion'd 
 Matters of needful value. We shall write to you, 
 As time and our concernings shall importune, 
 How it goes with us, and do look to know 
 What doth befall you here. So, fare you well; 
 To the hopeful execution do I leave you 
 Of your commissions. 
 ANGELO  Yet give leave, my lord, 
 That we may bring you something on the way. 
 DUKE VINCENTIO  My haste may not admit it; 
 Nor need you, on mine honour, have to do 
 With any scruple; your scope is as mine own 
 So to enforce or qualify the laws 
 As to your soul seems good. Give me your hand: 
 I'll privily away. I love the people, 
 But do not like to stage me to their eyes: 
 Through it do well, I do not relish well 
 Their loud applause and Aves vehement; 
 Nor do I think the man of safe discretion 
 That does affect it. Once more, fare you well. 
 ANGELO  The heavens give safety to your purposes! 
 ESCALUS  Lead forth and bring you back in happiness! 
 DUKE  I thank you. Fare you well. 

 Exit  ESCALUS  I shall desire you, sir, to give me leave 
 To have free speech with you; and it concerns me 
 To look into the bottom of my place: 
 A power I have, but of what strength and nature 
 I am not yet instructed. 
 ANGELO  'Tis so with me. Let us withdraw together, 
 And we may soon our satisfaction have 
 Touching that point. 
 ESCALUS  I'll wait upon your honour. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Measure for Measure  | Act 1, Scene 1 
 Next scene 