SCENE VI. The same. The Merchant of Venice  Shakespeare homepage  |  Merchant of Venice  | Act 2, Scene 6 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE VI. The same. 
 Enter GRATIANO and SALARINO, masqued  GRATIANO  This is the pent-house under which Lorenzo 
 Desired us to make stand. 
 SALARINO  His hour is almost past. 
 GRATIANO  And it is marvel he out-dwells his hour, 
 For lovers ever run before the clock. 
 SALARINO  O, ten times faster Venus' pigeons fly 
 To seal love's bonds new-made, than they are wont 
 To keep obliged faith unforfeited! 
 GRATIANO  That ever holds: who riseth from a feast 
 With that keen appetite that he sits down? 
 Where is the horse that doth untread again 
 His tedious measures with the unbated fire 
 That he did pace them first? All things that are, 
 Are with more spirit chased than enjoy'd. 
 How like a younker or a prodigal 
 The scarfed bark puts from her native bay, 
 Hugg'd and embraced by the strumpet wind! 
 How like the prodigal doth she return, 
 With over-weather'd ribs and ragged sails, 
 Lean, rent and beggar'd by the strumpet wind! 
 SALARINO  Here comes Lorenzo: more of this hereafter. 

 Enter LORENZO  LORENZO  Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode; 
 Not I, but my affairs, have made you wait: 
 When you shall please to play the thieves for wives, 
 I'll watch as long for you then. Approach; 
 Here dwells my father Jew. Ho! who's within? 

 Enter JESSICA, above, in boy's clothes  JESSICA  Who are you? Tell me, for more certainty, 
 Albeit I'll swear that I do know your tongue. 
 LORENZO  Lorenzo, and thy love. 
 JESSICA  Lorenzo, certain, and my love indeed, 
 For who love I so much? And now who knows 
 But you, Lorenzo, whether I am yours? 
 LORENZO  Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art. 
 JESSICA  Here, catch this casket; it is worth the pains. 
 I am glad 'tis night, you do not look on me, 
 For I am much ashamed of my exchange: 
 But love is blind and lovers cannot see 
 The pretty follies that themselves commit; 
 For if they could, Cupid himself would blush 
 To see me thus transformed to a boy. 
 LORENZO  Descend, for you must be my torchbearer. 
 JESSICA  What, must I hold a candle to my shames? 
 They in themselves, good-sooth, are too too light. 
 Why, 'tis an office of discovery, love; 
 And I should be obscured. 
 LORENZO  So are you, sweet, 
 Even in the lovely garnish of a boy. 
 But come at once; 
 For the close night doth play the runaway, 
 And we are stay'd for at Bassanio's feast. 
 JESSICA  I will make fast the doors, and gild myself 
 With some more ducats, and be with you straight. 

 Exit above  GRATIANO  Now, by my hood, a Gentile and no Jew. 
 LORENZO  Beshrew me but I love her heartily; 
 For she is wise, if I can judge of her, 
 And fair she is, if that mine eyes be true, 
 And true she is, as she hath proved herself, 
 And therefore, like herself, wise, fair and true, 
 Shall she be placed in my constant soul. 

 Enter JESSICA, below  What, art thou come? On, gentlemen; away! 
 Our masquing mates by this time for us stay. 

 Exit with Jessica and Salarino 
 Enter ANTONIO  ANTONIO  Who's there? 
 GRATIANO  Signior Antonio! 
 ANTONIO  Fie, fie, Gratiano! where are all the rest? 
 'Tis nine o'clock: our friends all stay for you. 
 No masque to-night: the wind is come about; 
 Bassanio presently will go aboard: 
 I have sent twenty out to seek for you. 
 GRATIANO  I am glad on't: I desire no more delight 
 Than to be under sail and gone to-night. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Merchant of Venice  | Act 2, Scene 6 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 