SCENE IX. Belmont. A room in PORTIA'S house. The Merchant of Venice  Shakespeare homepage  |  Merchant of Venice  | Act 2, Scene 9 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE IX. Belmont. A room in PORTIA'S house. 
 Enter NERISSA with a Servitor  NERISSA  Quick, quick, I pray thee; draw the curtain straight: 
 The Prince of Arragon hath ta'en his oath, 
 And comes to his election presently. 

 Flourish of cornets. Enter the PRINCE OF ARRAGON, PORTIA, and their trains  PORTIA  Behold, there stand the caskets, noble prince: 
 If you choose that wherein I am contain'd, 
 Straight shall our nuptial rites be solemnized: 
 But if you fail, without more speech, my lord, 
 You must be gone from hence immediately. 
 ARRAGON  I am enjoin'd by oath to observe three things: 
 First, never to unfold to any one 
 Which casket 'twas I chose; next, if I fail 
 Of the right casket, never in my life 
 To woo a maid in way of marriage: Lastly, 
 If I do fail in fortune of my choice, 
 Immediately to leave you and be gone. 
 PORTIA  To these injunctions every one doth swear 
 That comes to hazard for my worthless self. 
 ARRAGON  And so have I address'd me. Fortune now 
 To my heart's hope! Gold; silver; and base lead. 
 'Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.' 
 You shall look fairer, ere I give or hazard. 
 What says the golden chest? ha! let me see: 
 'Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.' 
 What many men desire! that 'many' may be meant 
 By the fool multitude, that choose by show, 
 Not learning more than the fond eye doth teach; 
 Which pries not to the interior, but, like the martlet, 
 Builds in the weather on the outward wall, 
 Even in the force and road of casualty. 
 I will not choose what many men desire, 
 Because I will not jump with common spirits 
 And rank me with the barbarous multitudes. 
 Why, then to thee, thou silver treasure-house; 
 Tell me once more what title thou dost bear: 
 'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves:' 
 And well said too; for who shall go about 
 To cozen fortune and be honourable 
 Without the stamp of merit? Let none presume 
 To wear an undeserved dignity. 
 O, that estates, degrees and offices 
 Were not derived corruptly, and that clear honour 
 Were purchased by the merit of the wearer! 
 How many then should cover that stand bare! 
 How many be commanded that command! 
 How much low peasantry would then be glean'd 
 From the true seed of honour! and how much honour 
 Pick'd from the chaff and ruin of the times 
 To be new-varnish'd! Well, but to my choice: 
 'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.' 
 I will assume desert. Give me a key for this, 
 And instantly unlock my fortunes here. 

 He opens the silver casket  PORTIA  Too long a pause for that which you find there. 
 ARRAGON  What's here? the portrait of a blinking idiot, 
 Presenting me a schedule! I will read it. 
 How much unlike art thou to Portia! 
 How much unlike my hopes and my deservings! 
 'Who chooseth me shall have as much as he deserves.' 
 Did I deserve no more than a fool's head? 
 Is that my prize? are my deserts no better? 
 PORTIA  To offend, and judge, are distinct offices 
 And of opposed natures. 
 ARRAGON  What is here? 

 Reads  The fire seven times tried this: 
 Seven times tried that judgment is, 
 That did never choose amiss. 
 Some there be that shadows kiss; 
 Such have but a shadow's bliss: 
 There be fools alive, I wis, 
 Silver'd o'er; and so was this. 
 Take what wife you will to bed, 
 I will ever be your head: 
 So be gone: you are sped. 
 Still more fool I shall appear 
 By the time I linger here 
 With one fool's head I came to woo, 
 But I go away with two. 
 Sweet, adieu. I'll keep my oath, 
 Patiently to bear my wroth. 

 Exeunt Arragon and train  PORTIA  Thus hath the candle singed the moth. 
 O, these deliberate fools! when they do choose, 
 They have the wisdom by their wit to lose. 
 NERISSA  The ancient saying is no heresy, 
 Hanging and wiving goes by destiny. 
 PORTIA  Come, draw the curtain, Nerissa. 

 Enter a Servant  Servant  Where is my lady? 
 PORTIA  Here: what would my lord? 
 Servant  Madam, there is alighted at your gate 
 A young Venetian, one that comes before 
 To signify the approaching of his lord; 
 From whom he bringeth sensible regreets, 
 To wit, besides commends and courteous breath, 
 Gifts of rich value. Yet I have not seen 
 So likely an ambassador of love: 
 A day in April never came so sweet, 
 To show how costly summer was at hand, 
 As this fore-spurrer comes before his lord. 
 PORTIA  No more, I pray thee: I am half afeard 
 Thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee, 
 Thou spend'st such high-day wit in praising him. 
 Come, come, Nerissa; for I long to see 
 Quick Cupid's post that comes so mannerly. 
 NERISSA  Bassanio, lord Love, if thy will it be! 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Merchant of Venice  | Act 2, Scene 9 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 