SCENE I. Before LEONATO'S house. Much Ado About Nothing  Shakespeare homepage  |  Much Ado About Nothing  | Act 1, Scene 1 
 Next scene  SCENE I. Before LEONATO'S house. 
 Enter LEONATO, HERO, and BEATRICE, with a Messenger  LEONATO  I learn in this letter that Don Peter of Arragon 
 comes this night to Messina. 
 Messenger  He is very near by this: he was not three leagues off 
 when I left him. 
 LEONATO  How many gentlemen have you lost in this action? 
 Messenger  But few of any sort, and none of name. 
 LEONATO  A victory is twice itself when the achiever brings 
 home full numbers. I find here that Don Peter hath 
 bestowed much honour on a young Florentine called Claudio. 
 Messenger  Much deserved on his part and equally remembered by 
 Don Pedro: he hath borne himself beyond the 
 promise of his age, doing, in the figure of a lamb, 
 the feats of a lion: he hath indeed better 
 bettered expectation than you must expect of me to 
 tell you how. 
 LEONATO  He hath an uncle here in Messina will be very much 
 glad of it. 
 Messenger  I have already delivered him letters, and there 
 appears much joy in him; even so much that joy could 
 not show itself modest enough without a badge of 
 bitterness. 
 LEONATO  Did he break out into tears? 
 Messenger  In great measure. 
 LEONATO  A kind overflow of kindness: there are no faces 
 truer than those that are so washed. How much 
 better is it to weep at joy than to joy at weeping! 
 BEATRICE  I pray you, is Signior Mountanto returned from the 
 wars or no? 
 Messenger  I know none of that name, lady: there was none such 
 in the army of any sort. 
 LEONATO  What is he that you ask for, niece? 
 HERO  My cousin means Signior Benedick of Padua. 
 Messenger  O, he's returned; and as pleasant as ever he was. 
 BEATRICE  He set up his bills here in Messina and challenged 
 Cupid at the flight; and my uncle's fool, reading 
 the challenge, subscribed for Cupid, and challenged 
 him at the bird-bolt. I pray you, how many hath he 
 killed and eaten in these wars? But how many hath 
 he killed? for indeed I promised to eat all of his killing. 
 LEONATO  Faith, niece, you tax Signior Benedick too much; 
 but he'll be meet with you, I doubt it not. 
 Messenger  He hath done good service, lady, in these wars. 
 BEATRICE  You had musty victual, and he hath holp to eat it: 
 he is a very valiant trencherman; he hath an 
 excellent stomach. 
 Messenger  And a good soldier too, lady. 
 BEATRICE  And a good soldier to a lady: but what is he to a lord? 
 Messenger  A lord to a lord, a man to a man; stuffed with all 
 honourable virtues. 
 BEATRICE  It is so, indeed; he is no less than a stuffed man: 
 but for the stuffing,--well, we are all mortal. 
 LEONATO  You must not, sir, mistake my niece. There is a 
 kind of merry war betwixt Signior Benedick and her: 
 they never meet but there's a skirmish of wit 
 between them. 
 BEATRICE  Alas! he gets nothing by that. In our last 
 conflict four of his five wits went halting off, and 
 now is the whole man governed with one: so that if 
 he have wit enough to keep himself warm, let him 
 bear it for a difference between himself and his 
 horse; for it is all the wealth that he hath left, 
 to be known a reasonable creature. Who is his 
 companion now? He hath every month a new sworn brother. 
 Messenger  Is't possible? 
 BEATRICE  Very easily possible: he wears his faith but as 
 the fashion of his hat; it ever changes with the 
 next block. 
 Messenger  I see, lady, the gentleman is not in your books. 
 BEATRICE  No; an he were, I would burn my study. But, I pray 
 you, who is his companion? Is there no young 
 squarer now that will make a voyage with him to the devil? 
 Messenger  He is most in the company of the right noble Claudio. 
 BEATRICE  O Lord, he will hang upon him like a disease: he 
 is sooner caught than the pestilence, and the taker 
 runs presently mad. God help the noble Claudio! if 
 he have caught the Benedick, it will cost him a 
 thousand pound ere a' be cured. 
 Messenger  I will hold friends with you, lady. 
 BEATRICE  Do, good friend. 
 LEONATO  You will never run mad, niece. 
 BEATRICE  No, not till a hot January. 
 Messenger  Don Pedro is approached. 

 Enter DON PEDRO, DON JOHN, CLAUDIO, BENEDICK, and BALTHASAR  DON PEDRO  Good Signior Leonato, you are come to meet your 
 trouble: the fashion of the world is to avoid 
 cost, and you encounter it. 
 LEONATO  Never came trouble to my house in the likeness of 
 your grace: for trouble being gone, comfort should 
 remain; but when you depart from me, sorrow abides 
 and happiness takes his leave. 
 DON PEDRO  You embrace your charge too willingly. I think this 
 is your daughter. 
 LEONATO  Her mother hath many times told me so. 
 BENEDICK  Were you in doubt, sir, that you asked her? 
 LEONATO  Signior Benedick, no; for then were you a child. 
 DON PEDRO  You have it full, Benedick: we may guess by this 
 what you are, being a man. Truly, the lady fathers 
 herself. Be happy, lady; for you are like an 
 honourable father. 
 BENEDICK  If Signior Leonato be her father, she would not 
 have his head on her shoulders for all Messina, as 
 like him as she is. 
 BEATRICE  I wonder that you will still be talking, Signior 
 Benedick: nobody marks you. 
 BENEDICK  What, my dear Lady Disdain! are you yet living? 
 BEATRICE  Is it possible disdain should die while she hath 
 such meet food to feed it as Signior Benedick? 
 Courtesy itself must convert to disdain, if you come 
 in her presence. 
 BENEDICK  Then is courtesy a turncoat. But it is certain I 
 am loved of all ladies, only you excepted: and I 
 would I could find in my heart that I had not a hard 
 heart; for, truly, I love none. 
 BEATRICE  A dear happiness to women: they would else have 
 been troubled with a pernicious suitor. I thank God 
 and my cold blood, I am of your humour for that: I 
 had rather hear my dog bark at a crow than a man 
 swear he loves me. 
 BENEDICK  God keep your ladyship still in that mind! so some 
 gentleman or other shall 'scape a predestinate 
 scratched face. 
 BEATRICE  Scratching could not make it worse, an 'twere such 
 a face as yours were. 
 BENEDICK  Well, you are a rare parrot-teacher. 
 BEATRICE  A bird of my tongue is better than a beast of yours. 
 BENEDICK  I would my horse had the speed of your tongue, and 
 so good a continuer. But keep your way, i' God's 
 name; I have done. 
 BEATRICE  You always end with a jade's trick: I know you of old. 
 DON PEDRO  That is the sum of all, Leonato. Signior Claudio 
 and Signior Benedick, my dear friend Leonato hath 
 invited you all. I tell him we shall stay here at 
 the least a month; and he heartily prays some 
 occasion may detain us longer. I dare swear he is no 
 hypocrite, but prays from his heart. 
 LEONATO  If you swear, my lord, you shall not be forsworn. 

 To DON JOHN  Let me bid you welcome, my lord: being reconciled to 
 the prince your brother, I owe you all duty. 
 DON JOHN  I thank you: I am not of many words, but I thank 
 you. 
 LEONATO  Please it your grace lead on? 
 DON PEDRO  Your hand, Leonato; we will go together. 

 Exeunt all except BENEDICK and CLAUDIO  CLAUDIO  Benedick, didst thou note the daughter of Signior Leonato? 
 BENEDICK  I noted her not; but I looked on her. 
 CLAUDIO  Is she not a modest young lady? 
 BENEDICK  Do you question me, as an honest man should do, for 
 my simple true judgment; or would you have me speak 
 after my custom, as being a professed tyrant to their sex? 
 CLAUDIO  No; I pray thee speak in sober judgment. 
 BENEDICK  Why, i' faith, methinks she's too low for a high 
 praise, too brown for a fair praise and too little 
 for a great praise: only this commendation I can 
 afford her, that were she other than she is, she 
 were unhandsome; and being no other but as she is, I 
 do not like her. 
 CLAUDIO  Thou thinkest I am in sport: I pray thee tell me 
 truly how thou likest her. 
 BENEDICK  Would you buy her, that you inquire after her? 
 CLAUDIO  Can the world buy such a jewel? 
 BENEDICK  Yea, and a case to put it into. But speak you this 
 with a sad brow? or do you play the flouting Jack, 
 to tell us Cupid is a good hare-finder and Vulcan a 
 rare carpenter? Come, in what key shall a man take 
 you, to go in the song? 
 CLAUDIO  In mine eye she is the sweetest lady that ever I 
 looked on. 
 BENEDICK  I can see yet without spectacles and I see no such 
 matter: there's her cousin, an she were not 
 possessed with a fury, exceeds her as much in beauty 
 as the first of May doth the last of December. But I 
 hope you have no intent to turn husband, have you? 
 CLAUDIO  I would scarce trust myself, though I had sworn the 
 contrary, if Hero would be my wife. 
 BENEDICK  Is't come to this? In faith, hath not the world 
 one man but he will wear his cap with suspicion? 
 Shall I never see a bachelor of three-score again? 
 Go to, i' faith; an thou wilt needs thrust thy neck 
 into a yoke, wear the print of it and sigh away 
 Sundays. Look Don Pedro is returned to seek you. 

 Re-enter DON PEDRO  DON PEDRO  What secret hath held you here, that you followed 
 not to Leonato's? 
 BENEDICK  I would your grace would constrain me to tell. 
 DON PEDRO  I charge thee on thy allegiance. 
 BENEDICK  You hear, Count Claudio: I can be secret as a dumb 
 man; I would have you think so; but, on my 
 allegiance, mark you this, on my allegiance. He is 
 in love. With who? now that is your grace's part. 
 Mark how short his answer is;--With Hero, Leonato's 
 short daughter. 
 CLAUDIO  If this were so, so were it uttered. 
 BENEDICK  Like the old tale, my lord: 'it is not so, nor 
 'twas not so, but, indeed, God forbid it should be 
 so.' 
 CLAUDIO  If my passion change not shortly, God forbid it 
 should be otherwise. 
 DON PEDRO  Amen, if you love her; for the lady is very well worthy. 
 CLAUDIO  You speak this to fetch me in, my lord. 
 DON PEDRO  By my troth, I speak my thought. 
 CLAUDIO  And, in faith, my lord, I spoke mine. 
 BENEDICK  And, by my two faiths and troths, my lord, I spoke mine. 
 CLAUDIO  That I love her, I feel. 
 DON PEDRO  That she is worthy, I know. 
 BENEDICK  That I neither feel how she should be loved nor 
 know how she should be worthy, is the opinion that 
 fire cannot melt out of me: I will die in it at the stake. 
 DON PEDRO  Thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the despite 
 of beauty. 
 CLAUDIO  And never could maintain his part but in the force 
 of his will. 
 BENEDICK  That a woman conceived me, I thank her; that she 
 brought me up, I likewise give her most humble 
 thanks: but that I will have a recheat winded in my 
 forehead, or hang my bugle in an invisible baldrick, 
 all women shall pardon me. Because I will not do 
 them the wrong to mistrust any, I will do myself the 
 right to trust none; and the fine is, for the which 
 I may go the finer, I will live a bachelor. 
 DON PEDRO  I shall see thee, ere I die, look pale with love. 
 BENEDICK  With anger, with sickness, or with hunger, my lord, 
 not with love: prove that ever I lose more blood 
 with love than I will get again with drinking, pick 
 out mine eyes with a ballad-maker's pen and hang me 
 up at the door of a brothel-house for the sign of 
 blind Cupid. 
 DON PEDRO  Well, if ever thou dost fall from this faith, thou 
 wilt prove a notable argument. 
 BENEDICK  If I do, hang me in a bottle like a cat and shoot 
 at me; and he that hits me, let him be clapped on 
 the shoulder, and called Adam. 
 DON PEDRO  Well, as time shall try: 'In time the savage bull 
 doth bear the yoke.' 
 BENEDICK  The savage bull may; but if ever the sensible 
 Benedick bear it, pluck off the bull's horns and set 
 them in my forehead: and let me be vilely painted, 
 and in such great letters as they write 'Here is 
 good horse to hire,' let them signify under my sign 
 'Here you may see Benedick the married man.' 
 CLAUDIO  If this should ever happen, thou wouldst be horn-mad. 
 DON PEDRO  Nay, if Cupid have not spent all his quiver in 
 Venice, thou wilt quake for this shortly. 
 BENEDICK  I look for an earthquake too, then. 
 DON PEDRO  Well, you temporize with the hours. In the 
 meantime, good Signior Benedick, repair to 
 Leonato's: commend me to him and tell him I will 
 not fail him at supper; for indeed he hath made 
 great preparation. 
 BENEDICK  I have almost matter enough in me for such an 
 embassage; and so I commit you-- 
 CLAUDIO  To the tuition of God: From my house, if I had it,-- 
 DON PEDRO  The sixth of July: Your loving friend, Benedick. 
 BENEDICK  Nay, mock not, mock not. The body of your 
 discourse is sometime guarded with fragments, and 
 the guards are but slightly basted on neither: ere 
 you flout old ends any further, examine your 
 conscience: and so I leave you. 

 Exit  CLAUDIO  My liege, your highness now may do me good. 
 DON PEDRO  My love is thine to teach: teach it but how, 
 And thou shalt see how apt it is to learn 
 Any hard lesson that may do thee good. 
 CLAUDIO  Hath Leonato any son, my lord? 
 DON PEDRO  No child but Hero; she's his only heir. 
 Dost thou affect her, Claudio? 
 CLAUDIO  O, my lord, 
 When you went onward on this ended action, 
 I look'd upon her with a soldier's eye, 
 That liked, but had a rougher task in hand 
 Than to drive liking to the name of love: 
 But now I am return'd and that war-thoughts 
 Have left their places vacant, in their rooms 
 Come thronging soft and delicate desires, 
 All prompting me how fair young Hero is, 
 Saying, I liked her ere I went to wars. 
 DON PEDRO  Thou wilt be like a lover presently 
 And tire the hearer with a book of words. 
 If thou dost love fair Hero, cherish it, 
 And I will break with her and with her father, 
 And thou shalt have her. Was't not to this end 
 That thou began'st to twist so fine a story? 
 CLAUDIO  How sweetly you do minister to love, 
 That know love's grief by his complexion! 
 But lest my liking might too sudden seem, 
 I would have salved it with a longer treatise. 
 DON PEDRO  What need the bridge much broader than the flood? 
 The fairest grant is the necessity. 
 Look, what will serve is fit: 'tis once, thou lovest, 
 And I will fit thee with the remedy. 
 I know we shall have revelling to-night: 
 I will assume thy part in some disguise 
 And tell fair Hero I am Claudio, 
 And in her bosom I'll unclasp my heart 
 And take her hearing prisoner with the force 
 And strong encounter of my amorous tale: 
 Then after to her father will I break; 
 And the conclusion is, she shall be thine. 
 In practise let us put it presently. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Much Ado About Nothing  | Act 1, Scene 1 
 Next scene 