SCENE III. A hall in the castle. Othello, the Moore of Venice  Shakespeare homepage  |  Othello  | Act 2, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. A hall in the castle. 
 Enter OTHELLO, DESDEMONA, CASSIO, and Attendants  OTHELLO  Good Michael, look you to the guard to-night: 
 Let's teach ourselves that honourable stop, 
 Not to outsport discretion. 
 CASSIO  Iago hath direction what to do; 
 But, notwithstanding, with my personal eye 
 Will I look to't. 
 OTHELLO  Iago is most honest. 
 Michael, good night: to-morrow with your earliest 
 Let me have speech with you. 

 To DESDEMONA  Come, my dear love, 
 The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue; 
 That profit's yet to come 'tween me and you. 
 Good night. 

 Exeunt OTHELLO, DESDEMONA, and Attendants 
 Enter IAGO  CASSIO  Welcome, Iago; we must to the watch. 
 IAGO  Not this hour, lieutenant; 'tis not yet ten o' the 
 clock. Our general cast us thus early for the love 
 of his Desdemona; who let us not therefore blame: 
 he hath not yet made wanton the night with her; and 
 she is sport for Jove. 
 CASSIO  She's a most exquisite lady. 
 IAGO  And, I'll warrant her, fun of game. 
 CASSIO  Indeed, she's a most fresh and delicate creature. 
 IAGO  What an eye she has! methinks it sounds a parley of 
 provocation. 
 CASSIO  An inviting eye; and yet methinks right modest. 
 IAGO  And when she speaks, is it not an alarum to love? 
 CASSIO  She is indeed perfection. 
 IAGO  Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieutenant, I 
 have a stoup of wine; and here without are a brace 
 of Cyprus gallants that would fain have a measure to 
 the health of black Othello. 
 CASSIO  Not to-night, good Iago: I have very poor and 
 unhappy brains for drinking: I could well wish 
 courtesy would invent some other custom of 
 entertainment. 
 IAGO  O, they are our friends; but one cup: I'll drink for 
 you. 
 CASSIO  I have drunk but one cup to-night, and that was 
 craftily qualified too, and, behold, what innovation 
 it makes here: I am unfortunate in the infirmity, 
 and dare not task my weakness with any more. 
 IAGO  What, man! 'tis a night of revels: the gallants 
 desire it. 
 CASSIO  Where are they? 
 IAGO  Here at the door; I pray you, call them in. 
 CASSIO  I'll do't; but it dislikes me. 

 Exit  IAGO  If I can fasten but one cup upon him, 
 With that which he hath drunk to-night already, 
 He'll be as full of quarrel and offence 
 As my young mistress' dog. Now, my sick fool Roderigo, 
 Whom love hath turn'd almost the wrong side out, 
 To Desdemona hath to-night caroused 
 Potations pottle-deep; and he's to watch: 
 Three lads of Cyprus, noble swelling spirits, 
 That hold their honours in a wary distance, 
 The very elements of this warlike isle, 
 Have I to-night fluster'd with flowing cups, 
 And they watch too. Now, 'mongst this flock of drunkards, 
 Am I to put our Cassio in some action 
 That may offend the isle.--But here they come: 
 If consequence do but approve my dream, 
 My boat sails freely, both with wind and stream. 

 Re-enter CASSIO; with him MONTANO and Gentlemen; servants following with wine  CASSIO  'Fore God, they have given me a rouse already. 
 MONTANO  Good faith, a little one; not past a pint, as I am 
 a soldier. 
 IAGO  Some wine, ho! 

 Sings  And let me the canakin clink, clink; 
 And let me the canakin clink 
 A soldier's a man; 
 A life's but a span; 
 Why, then, let a soldier drink. 
 Some wine, boys! 
 CASSIO  'Fore God, an excellent song. 
 IAGO  I learned it in England, where, indeed, they are 
 most potent in potting: your Dane, your German, and 
 your swag-bellied Hollander--Drink, ho!--are nothing 
 to your English. 
 CASSIO  Is your Englishman so expert in his drinking? 
 IAGO  Why, he drinks you, with facility, your Dane dead 
 drunk; he sweats not to overthrow your Almain; he 
 gives your Hollander a vomit, ere the next pottle 
 can be filled. 
 CASSIO  To the health of our general! 
 MONTANO  I am for it, lieutenant; and I'll do you justice. 
 IAGO  O sweet England! 
 King Stephen was a worthy peer, 
 His breeches cost him but a crown; 
 He held them sixpence all too dear, 
 With that he call'd the tailor lown. 
 He was a wight of high renown, 
 And thou art but of low degree: 
 'Tis pride that pulls the country down; 
 Then take thine auld cloak about thee. 
 Some wine, ho! 
 CASSIO  Why, this is a more exquisite song than the other. 
 IAGO  Will you hear't again? 
 CASSIO  No; for I hold him to be unworthy of his place that 
 does those things. Well, God's above all; and there 
 be souls must be saved, and there be souls must not be saved. 
 IAGO  It's true, good lieutenant. 
 CASSIO  For mine own part,--no offence to the general, nor 
 any man of quality,--I hope to be saved. 
 IAGO  And so do I too, lieutenant. 
 CASSIO  Ay, but, by your leave, not before me; the 
 lieutenant is to be saved before the ancient. Let's 
 have no more of this; let's to our affairs.--Forgive 
 us our sins!--Gentlemen, let's look to our business. 
 Do not think, gentlemen. I am drunk: this is my 
 ancient; this is my right hand, and this is my left: 
 I am not drunk now; I can stand well enough, and 
 speak well enough. 
 All  Excellent well. 
 CASSIO  Why, very well then; you must not think then that I am drunk. 

 Exit  MONTANO  To the platform, masters; come, let's set the watch. 
 IAGO  You see this fellow that is gone before; 
 He is a soldier fit to stand by Caesar 
 And give direction: and do but see his vice; 
 'Tis to his virtue a just equinox, 
 The one as long as the other: 'tis pity of him. 
 I fear the trust Othello puts him in. 
 On some odd time of his infirmity, 
 Will shake this island. 
 MONTANO  But is he often thus? 
 IAGO  'Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep: 
 He'll watch the horologe a double set, 
 If drink rock not his cradle. 
 MONTANO  It were well 
 The general were put in mind of it. 
 Perhaps he sees it not; or his good nature 
 Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio, 
 And looks not on his evils: is not this true? 

 Enter RODERIGO  IAGO  [Aside to him]  How now, Roderigo! 
 I pray you, after the lieutenant; go. 

 Exit RODERIGO  MONTANO  And 'tis great pity that the noble Moor 
 Should hazard such a place as his own second 
 With one of an ingraft infirmity: 
 It were an honest action to say 
 So to the Moor. 
 IAGO  Not I, for this fair island: 
 I do love Cassio well; and would do much 
 To cure him of this evil--But, hark! what noise? 

 Cry within: 'Help! help!' 
 Re-enter CASSIO, driving in RODERIGO  CASSIO  You rogue! you rascal! 
 MONTANO  What's the matter, lieutenant? 
 CASSIO  A knave teach me my duty! 
 I'll beat the knave into a twiggen bottle. 
 RODERIGO  Beat me! 
 CASSIO  Dost thou prate, rogue? 

 Striking RODERIGO  MONTANO  Nay, good lieutenant; 

 Staying him  I pray you, sir, hold your hand. 
 CASSIO  Let me go, sir, 
 Or I'll knock you o'er the mazzard. 
 MONTANO  Come, come, 
 you're drunk. 
 CASSIO  Drunk! 

 They fight  IAGO  [Aside to RODERIGO]  Away, I say; go out, and cry a mutiny. 

 Exit RODERIGO  Nay, good lieutenant,--alas, gentlemen;-- 
 Help, ho!--Lieutenant,--sir,--Montano,--sir; 
 Help, masters!--Here's a goodly watch indeed! 

 Bell rings  Who's that which rings the bell?--Diablo, ho! 
 The town will rise: God's will, lieutenant, hold! 
 You will be shamed for ever. 

 Re-enter OTHELLO and Attendants  OTHELLO  What is the matter here? 
 MONTANO  'Zounds, I bleed still; I am hurt to the death. 

 Faints  OTHELLO  Hold, for your lives! 
 IAGO  Hold, ho! Lieutenant,--sir--Montano,--gentlemen,-- 
 Have you forgot all sense of place and duty? 
 Hold! the general speaks to you; hold, hold, for shame! 
 OTHELLO  Why, how now, ho! from whence ariseth this? 
 Are we turn'd Turks, and to ourselves do that 
 Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites? 
 For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl: 
 He that stirs next to carve for his own rage 
 Holds his soul light; he dies upon his motion. 
 Silence that dreadful bell: it frights the isle 
 From her propriety. What is the matter, masters? 
 Honest Iago, that look'st dead with grieving, 
 Speak, who began this? on thy love, I charge thee. 
 IAGO  I do not know: friends all but now, even now, 
 In quarter, and in terms like bride and groom 
 Devesting them for bed; and then, but now-- 
 As if some planet had unwitted men-- 
 Swords out, and tilting one at other's breast, 
 In opposition bloody. I cannot speak 
 Any beginning to this peevish odds; 
 And would in action glorious I had lost 
 Those legs that brought me to a part of it! 
 OTHELLO  How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot? 
 CASSIO  I pray you, pardon me; I cannot speak. 
 OTHELLO  Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil; 
 The gravity and stillness of your youth 
 The world hath noted, and your name is great 
 In mouths of wisest censure: what's the matter, 
 That you unlace your reputation thus 
 And spend your rich opinion for the name 
 Of a night-brawler? give me answer to it. 
 MONTANO  Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger: 
 Your officer, Iago, can inform you,-- 
 While I spare speech, which something now 
 offends me,-- 
 Of all that I do know: nor know I aught 
 By me that's said or done amiss this night; 
 Unless self-charity be sometimes a vice, 
 And to defend ourselves it be a sin 
 When violence assails us. 
 OTHELLO  Now, by heaven, 
 My blood begins my safer guides to rule; 
 And passion, having my best judgment collied, 
 Assays to lead the way: if I once stir, 
 Or do but lift this arm, the best of you 
 Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know 
 How this foul rout began, who set it on; 
 And he that is approved in this offence, 
 Though he had twinn'd with me, both at a birth, 
 Shall lose me. What! in a town of war, 
 Yet wild, the people's hearts brimful of fear, 
 To manage private and domestic quarrel, 
 In night, and on the court and guard of safety! 
 'Tis monstrous. Iago, who began't? 
 MONTANO  If partially affined, or leagued in office, 
 Thou dost deliver more or less than truth, 
 Thou art no soldier. 
 IAGO  Touch me not so near: 
 I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth 
 Than it should do offence to Michael Cassio; 
 Yet, I persuade myself, to speak the truth 
 Shall nothing wrong him. Thus it is, general. 
 Montano and myself being in speech, 
 There comes a fellow crying out for help: 
 And Cassio following him with determined sword, 
 To execute upon him. Sir, this gentleman 
 Steps in to Cassio, and entreats his pause: 
 Myself the crying fellow did pursue, 
 Lest by his clamour--as it so fell out-- 
 The town might fall in fright: he, swift of foot, 
 Outran my purpose; and I return'd the rather 
 For that I heard the clink and fall of swords, 
 And Cassio high in oath; which till to-night 
 I ne'er might say before. When I came back-- 
 For this was brief--I found them close together, 
 At blow and thrust; even as again they were 
 When you yourself did part them. 
 More of this matter cannot I report: 
 But men are men; the best sometimes forget: 
 Though Cassio did some little wrong to him, 
 As men in rage strike those that wish them best, 
 Yet surely Cassio, I believe, received 
 From him that fled some strange indignity, 
 Which patience could not pass. 
 OTHELLO  I know, Iago, 
 Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter, 
 Making it light to Cassio. Cassio, I love thee 
 But never more be officer of mine. 

 Re-enter DESDEMONA, attended  Look, if my gentle love be not raised up! 
 I'll make thee an example. 
 DESDEMONA  What's the matter? 
 OTHELLO  All's well now, sweeting; come away to bed. 
 Sir, for your hurts, myself will be your surgeon: 
 Lead him off. 

 To MONTANO, who is led off  Iago, look with care about the town, 
 And silence those whom this vile brawl distracted. 
 Come, Desdemona: 'tis the soldiers' life 
 To have their balmy slumbers waked with strife. 

 Exeunt all but IAGO and CASSIO  IAGO  What, are you hurt, lieutenant? 
 CASSIO  Ay, past all surgery. 
 IAGO  Marry, heaven forbid! 
 CASSIO  Reputation, reputation, reputation! O, I have lost 
 my reputation! I have lost the immortal part of 
 myself, and what remains is bestial. My reputation, 
 Iago, my reputation! 
 IAGO  As I am an honest man, I thought you had received 
 some bodily wound; there is more sense in that than 
 in reputation. Reputation is an idle and most false 
 imposition: oft got without merit, and lost without 
 deserving: you have lost no reputation at all, 
 unless you repute yourself such a loser. What, man! 
 there are ways to recover the general again: you 
 are but now cast in his mood, a punishment more in 
 policy than in malice, even so as one would beat his 
 offenceless dog to affright an imperious lion: sue 
 to him again, and he's yours. 
 CASSIO  I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so 
 good a commander with so slight, so drunken, and so 
 indiscreet an officer. Drunk? and speak parrot? 
 and squabble? swagger? swear? and discourse 
 fustian with one's own shadow? O thou invisible 
 spirit of wine, if thou hast no name to be known by, 
 let us call thee devil! 
 IAGO  What was he that you followed with your sword? What 
 had he done to you? 
 CASSIO  I know not. 
 IAGO  Is't possible? 
 CASSIO  I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly; 
 a quarrel, but nothing wherefore. O God, that men 
 should put an enemy in their mouths to steal away 
 their brains! that we should, with joy, pleasance 
 revel and applause, transform ourselves into beasts! 
 IAGO  Why, but you are now well enough: how came you thus 
 recovered? 
 CASSIO  It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place 
 to the devil wrath; one unperfectness shows me 
 another, to make me frankly despise myself. 
 IAGO  Come, you are too severe a moraler: as the time, 
 the place, and the condition of this country 
 stands, I could heartily wish this had not befallen; 
 but, since it is as it is, mend it for your own good. 
 CASSIO  I will ask him for my place again; he shall tell me 
 I am a drunkard! Had I as many mouths as Hydra, 
 such an answer would stop them all. To be now a 
 sensible man, by and by a fool, and presently a 
 beast! O strange! Every inordinate cup is 
 unblessed and the ingredient is a devil. 
 IAGO  Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature, 
 if it be well used: exclaim no more against it. 
 And, good lieutenant, I think you think I love you. 
 CASSIO  I have well approved it, sir. I drunk! 
 IAGO  You or any man living may be drunk! at a time, man. 
 I'll tell you what you shall do. Our general's wife 
 is now the general: may say so in this respect, for 
 that he hath devoted and given up himself to the 
 contemplation, mark, and denotement of her parts and 
 graces: confess yourself freely to her; importune 
 her help to put you in your place again: she is of 
 so free, so kind, so apt, so blessed a disposition, 
 she holds it a vice in her goodness not to do more 
 than she is requested: this broken joint between 
 you and her husband entreat her to splinter; and, my 
 fortunes against any lay worth naming, this 
 crack of your love shall grow stronger than it was before. 
 CASSIO  You advise me well. 
 IAGO  I protest, in the sincerity of love and honest kindness. 
 CASSIO  I think it freely; and betimes in the morning I will 
 beseech the virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me: 
 I am desperate of my fortunes if they cheque me here. 
 IAGO  You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant; I 
 must to the watch. 
 CASSIO: Good night, honest Iago. 

 Exit  IAGO  And what's he then that says I play the villain? 
 When this advice is free I give and honest, 
 Probal to thinking and indeed the course 
 To win the Moor again? For 'tis most easy 
 The inclining Desdemona to subdue 
 In any honest suit: she's framed as fruitful 
 As the free elements. And then for her 
 To win the Moor--were't to renounce his baptism, 
 All seals and symbols of redeemed sin, 
 His soul is so enfetter'd to her love, 
 That she may make, unmake, do what she list, 
 Even as her appetite shall play the god 
 With his weak function. How am I then a villain 
 To counsel Cassio to this parallel course, 
 Directly to his good? Divinity of hell! 
 When devils will the blackest sins put on, 
 They do suggest at first with heavenly shows, 
 As I do now: for whiles this honest fool 
 Plies Desdemona to repair his fortunes 
 And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor, 
 I'll pour this pestilence into his ear, 
 That she repeals him for her body's lust; 
 And by how much she strives to do him good, 
 She shall undo her credit with the Moor. 
 So will I turn her virtue into pitch, 
 And out of her own goodness make the net 
 That shall enmesh them all. 

 Re-enter RODERIGO  How now, Roderigo! 
 RODERIGO  I do follow here in the chase, not like a hound that 
 hunts, but one that fills up the cry. My money is 
 almost spent; I have been to-night exceedingly well 
 cudgelled; and I think the issue will be, I shall 
 have so much experience for my pains, and so, with 
 no money at all and a little more wit, return again to Venice. 
 IAGO  How poor are they that have not patience! 
 What wound did ever heal but by degrees? 
 Thou know'st we work by wit, and not by witchcraft; 
 And wit depends on dilatory time. 
 Does't not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee. 
 And thou, by that small hurt, hast cashier'd Cassio: 
 Though other things grow fair against the sun, 
 Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe: 
 Content thyself awhile. By the mass, 'tis morning; 
 Pleasure and action make the hours seem short. 
 Retire thee; go where thou art billeted: 
 Away, I say; thou shalt know more hereafter: 
 Nay, get thee gone. 

 Exit RODERIGO  Two things are to be done: 
 My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress; 
 I'll set her on; 
 Myself the while to draw the Moor apart, 
 And bring him jump when he may Cassio find 
 Soliciting his wife: ay, that's the way 
 Dull not device by coldness and delay. 

 Exit  Shakespeare homepage  |  Othello  | Act 2, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 