SCENE I. Before the castle. Othello, the Moore of Venice  Shakespeare homepage  |  Othello  | Act 3, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. Before the castle. 
 Enter CASSIO and some Musicians  CASSIO  Masters, play here; I will content your pains; 
 Something that's brief; and bid 'Good morrow, general.' 

 Music 
 Enter Clown  Clown  Why masters, have your instruments been in Naples, 
 that they speak i' the nose thus? 
 First Musician  How, sir, how! 
 Clown  Are these, I pray you, wind-instruments? 
 First Musician  Ay, marry, are they, sir. 
 Clown  O, thereby hangs a tail. 
 First Musician  Whereby hangs a tale, sir? 
 Clown  Marry. sir, by many a wind-instrument that I know. 
 But, masters, here's money for you: and the general 
 so likes your music, that he desires you, for love's 
 sake, to make no more noise with it. 
 First Musician  Well, sir, we will not. 
 Clown  If you have any music that may not be heard, to't 
 again: but, as they say to hear music the general 
 does not greatly care. 
 First Musician  We have none such, sir. 
 Clown  Then put up your pipes in your bag, for I'll away: 
 go; vanish into air; away! 

 Exeunt Musicians  CASSIO  Dost thou hear, my honest friend? 
 Clown  No, I hear not your honest friend; I hear you. 
 CASSIO  Prithee, keep up thy quillets. There's a poor piece 
 of gold for thee: if the gentlewoman that attends 
 the general's wife be stirring, tell her there's 
 one Cassio entreats her a little favour of speech: 
 wilt thou do this? 
 Clown  She is stirring, sir: if she will stir hither, I 
 shall seem to notify unto her. 
 CASSIO  Do, good my friend. 

 Exit Clown 
 Enter IAGO  In happy time, Iago. 
 IAGO  You have not been a-bed, then? 
 CASSIO  Why, no; the day had broke 
 Before we parted. I have made bold, Iago, 
 To send in to your wife: my suit to her 
 Is, that she will to virtuous Desdemona 
 Procure me some access. 
 IAGO  I'll send her to you presently; 
 And I'll devise a mean to draw the Moor 
 Out of the way, that your converse and business 
 May be more free. 
 CASSIO  I humbly thank you for't. 

 Exit IAGO  I never knew 
 A Florentine more kind and honest. 

 Enter EMILIA  EMILIA  Good morrow, good Lieutenant: I am sorry 
 For your displeasure; but all will sure be well. 
 The general and his wife are talking of it; 
 And she speaks for you stoutly: the Moor replies, 
 That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus, 
 And great affinity, and that in wholesome wisdom 
 He might not but refuse you; but he protests he loves you 
 And needs no other suitor but his likings 
 To take the safest occasion by the front 
 To bring you in again. 
 CASSIO  Yet, I beseech you, 
 If you think fit, or that it may be done, 
 Give me advantage of some brief discourse 
 With Desdemona alone. 
 EMILIA  Pray you, come in; 
 I will bestow you where you shall have time 
 To speak your bosom freely. 
 CASSIO  I am much bound to you. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Othello  | Act 3, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 