SCENE V. The Tower-walls. The Life and Death of Richard the Third  Shakespeare homepage  |  Richard III  | Act 3, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE V. The Tower-walls. 
 Enter GLOUCESTER and BUCKINGHAM, in rotten armour, marvellous ill-favoured  GLOUCESTER  Come, cousin, canst thou quake, and change thy colour, 
 Murder thy breath in the middle of a word, 
 And then begin again, and stop again, 
 As if thou wert distraught and mad with terror? 
 BUCKINGHAM  Tut, I can counterfeit the deep tragedian; 
 Speak and look back, and pry on every side, 
 Tremble and start at wagging of a straw, 
 Intending deep suspicion: ghastly looks 
 Are at my service, like enforced smiles; 
 And both are ready in their offices, 
 At any time, to grace my stratagems. 
 But what, is Catesby gone? 
 GLOUCESTER  He is; and, see, he brings the mayor along. 

 Enter the Lord Mayor and CATESBY  BUCKINGHAM  Lord mayor,-- 
 GLOUCESTER  Look to the drawbridge there! 
 BUCKINGHAM  Hark! a drum. 
 GLOUCESTER  Catesby, o'erlook the walls. 
 BUCKINGHAM  Lord mayor, the reason we have sent-- 
 GLOUCESTER  Look back, defend thee, here are enemies. 
 BUCKINGHAM  God and our innocency defend and guard us! 
 GLOUCESTER  Be patient, they are friends, Ratcliff and Lovel. 

 Enter LOVEL and RATCLIFF, with HASTINGS' head  LOVEL  Here is the head of that ignoble traitor, 
 The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings. 
 GLOUCESTER  So dear I loved the man, that I must weep. 
 I took him for the plainest harmless creature 
 That breathed upon this earth a Christian; 
 Made him my book wherein my soul recorded 
 The history of all her secret thoughts: 
 So smooth he daub'd his vice with show of virtue, 
 That, his apparent open guilt omitted, 
 I mean, his conversation with Shore's wife, 
 He lived from all attainder of suspect. 
 BUCKINGHAM  Well, well, he was the covert'st shelter'd traitor 
 That ever lived. 
 Would you imagine, or almost believe, 
 Were't not that, by great preservation, 
 We live to tell it you, the subtle traitor 
 This day had plotted, in the council-house 
 To murder me and my good Lord of Gloucester? 
 Lord Mayor  What, had he so? 
 GLOUCESTER  What, think You we are Turks or infidels? 
 Or that we would, against the form of law, 
 Proceed thus rashly to the villain's death, 
 But that the extreme peril of the case, 
 The peace of England and our persons' safety, 
 Enforced us to this execution? 
 Lord Mayor  Now, fair befall you! he deserved his death; 
 And you my good lords, both have well proceeded, 
 To warn false traitors from the like attempts. 
 I never look'd for better at his hands, 
 After he once fell in with Mistress Shore. 
 GLOUCESTER  Yet had not we determined he should die, 
 Until your lordship came to see his death; 
 Which now the loving haste of these our friends, 
 Somewhat against our meaning, have prevented: 
 Because, my lord, we would have had you heard 
 The traitor speak, and timorously confess 
 The manner and the purpose of his treason; 
 That you might well have signified the same 
 Unto the citizens, who haply may 
 Misconstrue us in him and wail his death. 
 Lord Mayor  But, my good lord, your grace's word shall serve, 
 As well as I had seen and heard him speak 
 And doubt you not, right noble princes both, 
 But I'll acquaint our duteous citizens 
 With all your just proceedings in this cause. 
 GLOUCESTER  And to that end we wish'd your lord-ship here, 
 To avoid the carping censures of the world. 
 BUCKINGHAM  But since you come too late of our intents, 
 Yet witness what you hear we did intend: 
 And so, my good lord mayor, we bid farewell. 

 Exit Lord Mayor  GLOUCESTER  Go, after, after, cousin Buckingham. 
 The mayor towards Guildhall hies him in all post: 
 There, at your meet'st advantage of the time, 
 Infer the bastardy of Edward's children: 
 Tell them how Edward put to death a citizen, 
 Only for saying he would make his son 
 Heir to the crown; meaning indeed his house, 
 Which, by the sign thereof was termed so. 
 Moreover, urge his hateful luxury 
 And bestial appetite in change of lust; 
 Which stretched to their servants, daughters, wives, 
 Even where his lustful eye or savage heart, 
 Without control, listed to make his prey. 
 Nay, for a need, thus far come near my person: 
 Tell them, when that my mother went with child 
 Of that unsatiate Edward, noble York 
 My princely father then had wars in France 
 And, by just computation of the time, 
 Found that the issue was not his begot; 
 Which well appeared in his lineaments, 
 Being nothing like the noble duke my father: 
 But touch this sparingly, as 'twere far off, 
 Because you know, my lord, my mother lives. 
 BUCKINGHAM  Fear not, my lord, I'll play the orator 
 As if the golden fee for which I plead 
 Were for myself: and so, my lord, adieu. 
 GLOUCESTER  If you thrive well, bring them to Baynard's Castle; 
 Where you shall find me well accompanied 
 With reverend fathers and well-learned bishops. 
 BUCKINGHAM  I go: and towards three or four o'clock 
 Look for the news that the Guildhall affords. 

 Exit BUCKINGHAM  GLOUCESTER  Go, Lovel, with all speed to Doctor Shaw; 

 To CATESBY  Go thou to Friar Penker; bid them both 
 Meet me within this hour at Baynard's Castle. 

 Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER  Now will I in, to take some privy order, 
 To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight; 
 And to give notice, that no manner of person 
 At any time have recourse unto the princes. 

 Exit  Shakespeare homepage  |  Richard III  | Act 3, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 