SCENE II. The palace. The Life and Death of Richard the Second  Shakespeare homepage  |  Richard II  | Act 2, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. The palace. 
 Enter QUEEN, BUSHY, and BAGOT  BUSHY  Madam, your majesty is too much sad: 
 You promised, when you parted with the king, 
 To lay aside life-harming heaviness 
 And entertain a cheerful disposition. 
 QUEEN  To please the king I did; to please myself 
 I cannot do it; yet I know no cause 
 Why I should welcome such a guest as grief, 
 Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest 
 As my sweet Richard: yet again, methinks, 
 Some unborn sorrow, ripe in fortune's womb, 
 Is coming towards me, and my inward soul 
 With nothing trembles: at some thing it grieves, 
 More than with parting from my lord the king. 
 BUSHY  Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows, 
 Which shows like grief itself, but is not so; 
 For sorrow's eye, glazed with blinding tears, 
 Divides one thing entire to many objects; 
 Like perspectives, which rightly gazed upon 
 Show nothing but confusion, eyed awry 
 Distinguish form: so your sweet majesty, 
 Looking awry upon your lord's departure, 
 Find shapes of grief, more than himself, to wail; 
 Which, look'd on as it is, is nought but shadows 
 Of what it is not. Then, thrice-gracious queen, 
 More than your lord's departure weep not: more's not seen; 
 Or if it be, 'tis with false sorrow's eye, 
 Which for things true weeps things imaginary. 
 QUEEN  It may be so; but yet my inward soul 
 Persuades me it is otherwise: howe'er it be, 
 I cannot but be sad; so heavy sad 
 As, though on thinking on no thought I think, 
 Makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink. 
 BUSHY  'Tis nothing but conceit, my gracious lady. 
 QUEEN  'Tis nothing less: conceit is still derived 
 From some forefather grief; mine is not so, 
 For nothing had begot my something grief; 
 Or something hath the nothing that I grieve: 
 'Tis in reversion that I do possess; 
 But what it is, that is not yet known; what 
 I cannot name; 'tis nameless woe, I wot. 

 Enter GREEN  GREEN  God save your majesty! and well met, gentlemen: 
 I hope the king is not yet shipp'd for Ireland. 
 QUEEN  Why hopest thou so? 'tis better hope he is; 
 For his designs crave haste, his haste good hope: 
 Then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipp'd? 
 GREEN  That he, our hope, might have retired his power, 
 And driven into despair an enemy's hope, 
 Who strongly hath set footing in this land: 
 The banish'd Bolingbroke repeals himself, 
 And with uplifted arms is safe arrived 
 At Ravenspurgh. 
 QUEEN  Now God in heaven forbid! 
 GREEN  Ah, madam, 'tis too true: and that is worse, 
 The Lord Northumberland, his son young Henry Percy, 
 The Lords of Ross, Beaumond, and Willoughby, 
 With all their powerful friends, are fled to him. 
 BUSHY  Why have you not proclaim'd Northumberland 
 And all the rest revolted faction traitors? 
 GREEN  We have: whereupon the Earl of Worcester 
 Hath broke his staff, resign'd his stewardship, 
 And all the household servants fled with him 
 To Bolingbroke. 
 QUEEN  So, Green, thou art the midwife to my woe, 
 And Bolingbroke my sorrow's dismal heir: 
 Now hath my soul brought forth her prodigy, 
 And I, a gasping new-deliver'd mother, 
 Have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow join'd. 
 BUSHY  Despair not, madam. 
 QUEEN  Who shall hinder me? 
 I will despair, and be at enmity 
 With cozening hope: he is a flatterer, 
 A parasite, a keeper back of death, 
 Who gently would dissolve the bands of life, 
 Which false hope lingers in extremity. 

 Enter DUKE OF YORK  GREEN  Here comes the Duke of York. 
 QUEEN  With signs of war about his aged neck: 
 O, full of careful business are his looks! 
 Uncle, for God's sake, speak comfortable words. 
 DUKE OF YORK  Should I do so, I should belie my thoughts: 
 Comfort's in heaven; and we are on the earth, 
 Where nothing lives but crosses, cares and grief. 
 Your husband, he is gone to save far off, 
 Whilst others come to make him lose at home: 
 Here am I left to underprop his land, 
 Who, weak with age, cannot support myself: 
 Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made; 
 Now shall he try his friends that flatter'd him. 

 Enter a Servant  Servant  My lord, your son was gone before I came. 
 DUKE OF YORK  He was? Why, so! go all which way it will! 
 The nobles they are fled, the commons they are cold, 
 And will, I fear, revolt on Hereford's side. 
 Sirrah, get thee to Plashy, to my sister Gloucester; 
 Bid her send me presently a thousand pound: 
 Hold, take my ring. 
 Servant  My lord, I had forgot to tell your lordship, 
 To-day, as I came by, I called there; 
 But I shall grieve you to report the rest. 
 DUKE OF YORK  What is't, knave? 
 Servant  An hour before I came, the duchess died. 
 DUKE OF YORK  God for his mercy! what a tide of woes 
 Comes rushing on this woeful land at once! 
 I know not what to do: I would to God, 
 So my untruth had not provoked him to it, 
 The king had cut off my head with my brother's. 
 What, are there no posts dispatch'd for Ireland? 
 How shall we do for money for these wars? 
 Come, sister,--cousin, I would say--pray, pardon me. 
 Go, fellow, get thee home, provide some carts 
 And bring away the armour that is there. 

 Exit Servant  Gentlemen, will you go muster men? 
 If I know how or which way to order these affairs 
 Thus thrust disorderly into my hands, 
 Never believe me. Both are my kinsmen: 
 The one is my sovereign, whom both my oath 
 And duty bids defend; the other again 
 Is my kinsman, whom the king hath wrong'd, 
 Whom conscience and my kindred bids to right. 
 Well, somewhat we must do. Come, cousin, I'll 
 Dispose of you. 
 Gentlemen, go, muster up your men, 
 And meet me presently at Berkeley. 
 I should to Plashy too; 
 But time will not permit: all is uneven, 
 And every thing is left at six and seven. 

 Exeunt DUKE OF YORK and QUEEN  BUSHY  The wind sits fair for news to go to Ireland, 
 But none returns. For us to levy power 
 Proportionable to the enemy 
 Is all unpossible. 
 GREEN  Besides, our nearness to the king in love 
 Is near the hate of those love not the king. 
 BAGOT  And that's the wavering commons: for their love 
 Lies in their purses, and whoso empties them 
 By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate. 
 BUSHY  Wherein the king stands generally condemn'd. 
 BAGOT  If judgement lie in them, then so do we, 
 Because we ever have been near the king. 
 GREEN  Well, I will for refuge straight to Bristol castle: 
 The Earl of Wiltshire is already there. 
 BUSHY  Thither will I with you; for little office 
 The hateful commons will perform for us, 
 Except like curs to tear us all to pieces. 
 Will you go along with us? 
 BAGOT  No; I will to Ireland to his majesty. 
 Farewell: if heart's presages be not vain, 
 We three here art that ne'er shall meet again. 
 BUSHY  That's as York thrives to beat back Bolingbroke. 
 GREEN  Alas, poor duke! the task he undertakes 
 Is numbering sands and drinking oceans dry: 
 Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly. 
 Farewell at once, for once, for all, and ever. 
 BUSHY  Well, we may meet again. 
 BAGOT  I fear me, never. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Richard II  | Act 2, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 