SCENE III. Wilds in Gloucestershire. The Life and Death of Richard the Second  Shakespeare homepage  |  Richard II  | Act 2, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. Wilds in Gloucestershire. 
 Enter HENRY BOLINGBROKE and NORTHUMBERLAND, with Forces  HENRY BOLINGBROKE  How far is it, my lord, to Berkeley now? 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  Believe me, noble lord, 
 I am a stranger here in Gloucestershire: 
 These high wild hills and rough uneven ways 
 Draws out our miles, and makes them wearisome, 
 And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar, 
 Making the hard way sweet and delectable. 
 But I bethink me what a weary way 
 From Ravenspurgh to Cotswold will be found 
 In Ross and Willoughby, wanting your company, 
 Which, I protest, hath very much beguiled 
 The tediousness and process of my travel: 
 But theirs is sweetened with the hope to have 
 The present benefit which I possess; 
 And hope to joy is little less in joy 
 Than hope enjoy'd: by this the weary lords 
 Shall make their way seem short, as mine hath done 
 By sight of what I have, your noble company. 
 HENRY BOLINGBROKE  Of much less value is my company 
 Than your good words. But who comes here? 

 Enter HENRY PERCY  NORTHUMBERLAND  It is my son, young Harry Percy, 
 Sent from my brother Worcester, whencesoever. 
 Harry, how fares your uncle? 
 HENRY PERCY  I had thought, my lord, to have learn'd his health of you. 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  Why, is he not with the queen? 
 HENRY PERCY  No, my good Lord; he hath forsook the court, 
 Broken his staff of office and dispersed 
 The household of the king. 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  What was his reason? 
 He was not so resolved when last we spake together. 
 HENRY PERCY  Because your lordship was proclaimed traitor. 
 But he, my lord, is gone to Ravenspurgh, 
 To offer service to the Duke of Hereford, 
 And sent me over by Berkeley, to discover 
 What power the Duke of York had levied there; 
 Then with directions to repair to Ravenspurgh. 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  Have you forgot the Duke of Hereford, boy? 
 HENRY PERCY  No, my good lord, for that is not forgot 
 Which ne'er I did remember: to my knowledge, 
 I never in my life did look on him. 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  Then learn to know him now; this is the duke. 
 HENRY PERCY  My gracious lord, I tender you my service, 
 Such as it is, being tender, raw and young: 
 Which elder days shall ripen and confirm 
 To more approved service and desert. 
 HENRY BOLINGBROKE  I thank thee, gentle Percy; and be sure 
 I count myself in nothing else so happy 
 As in a soul remembering my good friends; 
 And, as my fortune ripens with thy love, 
 It shall be still thy true love's recompense: 
 My heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it. 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  How far is it to Berkeley? and what stir 
 Keeps good old York there with his men of war? 
 HENRY PERCY  There stands the castle, by yon tuft of trees, 
 Mann'd with three hundred men, as I have heard; 
 And in it are the Lords of York, Berkeley, and Seymour; 
 None else of name and noble estimate. 

 Enter LORD ROSS and LORD WILLOUGHBY  NORTHUMBERLAND  Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby, 
 Bloody with spurring, fiery-red with haste. 
 HENRY BOLINGBROKE  Welcome, my lords. I wot your love pursues 
 A banish'd traitor: all my treasury 
 Is yet but unfelt thanks, which more enrich'd 
 Shall be your love and labour's recompense. 
 LORD ROSS  Your presence makes us rich, most noble lord. 
 LORD WILLOUGHBY  And far surmounts our labour to attain it. 
 HENRY BOLINGBROKE  Evermore thanks, the exchequer of the poor; 
 Which, till my infant fortune comes to years, 
 Stands for my bounty. But who comes here? 

 Enter LORD BERKELEY  NORTHUMBERLAND  It is my Lord of Berkeley, as I guess. 
 LORD BERKELEY  My Lord of Hereford, my message is to you. 
 HENRY BOLINGBROKE  My lord, my answer is--to Lancaster; 
 And I am come to seek that name in England; 
 And I must find that title in your tongue, 
 Before I make reply to aught you say. 
 LORD BERKELEY  Mistake me not, my lord; 'tis not my meaning 
 To raze one title of your honour out: 
 To you, my lord, I come, what lord you will, 
 From the most gracious regent of this land, 
 The Duke of York, to know what pricks you on 
 To take advantage of the absent time 
 And fright our native peace with self-born arms. 

 Enter DUKE OF YORK attended  HENRY BOLINGBROKE  I shall not need transport my words by you; 
 Here comes his grace in person. My noble uncle! 

 Kneels  DUKE OF YORK  Show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee, 
 Whose duty is deceiveable and false. 
 HENRY BOLINGBROKE  My gracious uncle-- 
 DUKE OF YORK  Tut, tut! 
 Grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle: 
 I am no traitor's uncle; and that word 'grace.' 
 In an ungracious mouth is but profane. 
 Why have those banish'd and forbidden legs 
 Dared once to touch a dust of England's ground? 
 But then more 'why?' why have they dared to march 
 So many miles upon her peaceful bosom, 
 Frighting her pale-faced villages with war 
 And ostentation of despised arms? 
 Comest thou because the anointed king is hence? 
 Why, foolish boy, the king is left behind, 
 And in my loyal bosom lies his power. 
 Were I but now the lord of such hot youth 
 As when brave Gaunt, thy father, and myself 
 Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men, 
 From forth the ranks of many thousand French, 
 O, then how quickly should this arm of mine. 
 Now prisoner to the palsy, chastise thee 
 And minister correction to thy fault! 
 HENRY BOLINGBROKE  My gracious uncle, let me know my fault: 
 On what condition stands it and wherein? 
 DUKE OF YORK  Even in condition of the worst degree, 
 In gross rebellion and detested treason: 
 Thou art a banish'd man, and here art come 
 Before the expiration of thy time, 
 In braving arms against thy sovereign. 
 HENRY BOLINGBROKE  As I was banish'd, I was banish'd Hereford; 
 But as I come, I come for Lancaster. 
 And, noble uncle, I beseech your grace 
 Look on my wrongs with an indifferent eye: 
 You are my father, for methinks in you 
 I see old Gaunt alive; O, then, my father, 
 Will you permit that I shall stand condemn'd 
 A wandering vagabond; my rights and royalties 
 Pluck'd from my arms perforce and given away 
 To upstart unthrifts? Wherefore was I born? 
 If that my cousin king be King of England, 
 It must be granted I am Duke of Lancaster. 
 You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin; 
 Had you first died, and he been thus trod down, 
 He should have found his uncle Gaunt a father, 
 To rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay. 
 I am denied to sue my livery here, 
 And yet my letters-patents give me leave: 
 My father's goods are all distrain'd and sold, 
 And these and all are all amiss employ'd. 
 What would you have me do? I am a subject, 
 And I challenge law: attorneys are denied me; 
 And therefore, personally I lay my claim 
 To my inheritance of free descent. 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  The noble duke hath been too much abused. 
 LORD ROSS  It stands your grace upon to do him right. 
 LORD WILLOUGHBY  Base men by his endowments are made great. 
 DUKE OF YORK  My lords of England, let me tell you this: 
 I have had feeling of my cousin's wrongs 
 And laboured all I could to do him right; 
 But in this kind to come, in braving arms, 
 Be his own carver and cut out his way, 
 To find out right with wrong, it may not be; 
 And you that do abet him in this kind 
 Cherish rebellion and are rebels all. 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  The noble duke hath sworn his coming is 
 But for his own; and for the right of that 
 We all have strongly sworn to give him aid; 
 And let him ne'er see joy that breaks that oath! 
 DUKE OF YORK  Well, well, I see the issue of these arms: 
 I cannot mend it, I must needs confess, 
 Because my power is weak and all ill left: 
 But if I could, by Him that gave me life, 
 I would attach you all and make you stoop 
 Unto the sovereign mercy of the king; 
 But since I cannot, be it known to you 
 I do remain as neuter. So, fare you well; 
 Unless you please to enter in the castle 
 And there repose you for this night. 
 HENRY BOLINGBROKE  An offer, uncle, that we will accept: 
 But we must win your grace to go with us 
 To Bristol castle, which they say is held 
 By Bushy, Bagot and their complices, 
 The caterpillars of the commonwealth, 
 Which I have sworn to weed and pluck away. 
 DUKE OF YORK  It may be I will go with you: but yet I'll pause; 
 For I am loath to break our country's laws. 
 Nor friends nor foes, to me welcome you are: 
 Things past redress are now with me past care. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Richard II  | Act 2, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 