SCENE III. Wales. Before Flint castle. The Life and Death of Richard the Second  Shakespeare homepage  |  Richard II  | Act 3, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. Wales. Before Flint castle. 
 Enter, with drum and colours, HENRY BOLINGBROKE, DUKE OF YORK, NORTHUMBERLAND, Attendants, and forces  HENRY BOLINGBROKE  So that by this intelligence we learn 
 The Welshmen are dispersed, and Salisbury 
 Is gone to meet the king, who lately landed 
 With some few private friends upon this coast. 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  The news is very fair and good, my lord: 
 Richard not far from hence hath hid his head. 
 DUKE OF YORK  It would beseem the Lord Northumberland 
 To say 'King Richard:' alack the heavy day 
 When such a sacred king should hide his head. 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  Your grace mistakes; only to be brief 
 Left I his title out. 
 DUKE OF YORK  The time hath been, 
 Would you have been so brief with him, he would 
 Have been so brief with you, to shorten you, 
 For taking so the head, your whole head's length. 
 HENRY BOLINGBROKE  Mistake not, uncle, further than you should. 
 DUKE OF YORK  Take not, good cousin, further than you should. 
 Lest you mistake the heavens are o'er our heads. 
 HENRY BOLINGBROKE  I know it, uncle, and oppose not myself 
 Against their will. But who comes here? 

 Enter HENRY PERCY  Welcome, Harry: what, will not this castle yield? 
 HENRY PERCY  The castle royally is mann'd, my lord, 
 Against thy entrance. 
 HENRY BOLINGBROKE  Royally! 
 Why, it contains no king? 
 HENRY PERCY  Yes, my good lord, 
 It doth contain a king; King Richard lies 
 Within the limits of yon lime and stone: 
 And with him are the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury, 
 Sir Stephen Scroop, besides a clergyman 
 Of holy reverence; who, I cannot learn. 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  O, belike it is the Bishop of Carlisle. 
 HENRY BOLINGBROKE  Noble lords, 
 Go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle; 
 Through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley 
 Into his ruin'd ears, and thus deliver: 
 Henry Bolingbroke 
 On both his knees doth kiss King Richard's hand 
 And sends allegiance and true faith of heart 
 To his most royal person, hither come 
 Even at his feet to lay my arms and power, 
 Provided that my banishment repeal'd 
 And lands restored again be freely granted: 
 If not, I'll use the advantage of my power 
 And lay the summer's dust with showers of blood 
 Rain'd from the wounds of slaughter'd Englishmen: 
 The which, how far off from the mind of Bolingbroke 
 It is, such crimson tempest should bedrench 
 The fresh green lap of fair King Richard's land, 
 My stooping duty tenderly shall show. 
 Go, signify as much, while here we march 
 Upon the grassy carpet of this plain. 
 Let's march without the noise of threatening drum, 
 That from this castle's tatter'd battlements 
 Our fair appointments may be well perused. 
 Methinks King Richard and myself should meet 
 With no less terror than the elements 
 Of fire and water, when their thundering shock 
 At meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven. 
 Be he the fire, I'll be the yielding water: 
 The rage be his, whilst on the earth I rain 
 My waters; on the earth, and not on him. 
 March on, and mark King Richard how he looks. 

 Parle without, and answer within. Then a flourish.  Enter on the walls, KING RICHARD II, the BISHOP OF  CARLISLE, DUKE OF AUMERLE, SIR STEPHEN SCROOP, and EARL OF SALISBURY  See, see, King Richard doth himself appear, 
 As doth the blushing discontented sun 
 From out the fiery portal of the east, 
 When he perceives the envious clouds are bent 
 To dim his glory and to stain the track 
 Of his bright passage to the occident. 
 DUKE OF YORK  Yet looks he like a king: behold, his eye, 
 As bright as is the eagle's, lightens forth 
 Controlling majesty: alack, alack, for woe, 
 That any harm should stain so fair a show! 
 KING RICHARD II  We are amazed; and thus long have we stood 
 To watch the fearful bending of thy knee, 

 To NORTHUMBERLAND  Because we thought ourself thy lawful king: 
 And if we be, how dare thy joints forget 
 To pay their awful duty to our presence? 
 If we be not, show us the hand of God 
 That hath dismissed us from our stewardship; 
 For well we know, no hand of blood and bone 
 Can gripe the sacred handle of our sceptre, 
 Unless he do profane, steal, or usurp. 
 And though you think that all, as you have done, 
 Have torn their souls by turning them from us, 
 And we are barren and bereft of friends; 
 Yet know, my master, God omnipotent, 
 Is mustering in his clouds on our behalf 
 Armies of pestilence; and they shall strike 
 Your children yet unborn and unbegot, 
 That lift your vassal hands against my head 
 And threat the glory of my precious crown. 
 Tell Bolingbroke--for yond methinks he stands-- 
 That every stride he makes upon my land 
 Is dangerous treason: he is come to open 
 The purple testament of bleeding war; 
 But ere the crown he looks for live in peace, 
 Ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers' sons 
 Shall ill become the flower of England's face, 
 Change the complexion of her maid-pale peace 
 To scarlet indignation and bedew 
 Her pastures' grass with faithful English blood. 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  The king of heaven forbid our lord the king 
 Should so with civil and uncivil arms 
 Be rush'd upon! Thy thrice noble cousin 
 Harry Bolingbroke doth humbly kiss thy hand; 
 And by the honourable tomb he swears, 
 That stands upon your royal grandsire's bones, 
 And by the royalties of both your bloods, 
 Currents that spring from one most gracious head, 
 And by the buried hand of warlike Gaunt, 
 And by the worth and honour of himself, 
 Comprising all that may be sworn or said, 
 His coming hither hath no further scope 
 Than for his lineal royalties and to beg 
 Enfranchisement immediate on his kn ees: 
 Which on thy royal party granted once, 
 His glittering arms he will commend to rust, 
 His barbed steeds to stables, and his heart 
 To faithful service of your majesty. 
 This swears he, as he is a prince, is just; 
 And, as I am a gentleman, I credit him. 
 KING RICHARD II  Northumberland, say thus the king returns: 
 His noble cousin is right welcome hither; 
 And all the number of his fair demands 
 Shall be accomplish'd without contradiction: 
 With all the gracious utterance thou hast 
 Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends. 
 We do debase ourselves, cousin, do we not, 

 To DUKE OF AUMERLE  To look so poorly and to speak so fair? 
 Shall we call back Northumberland, and send 
 Defiance to the traitor, and so die? 
 DUKE OF AUMERLE  No, good my lord; let's fight with gentle words 
 Till time lend friends and friends their helpful swords. 
 KING RICHARD II  O God, O God! that e'er this tongue of mine, 
 That laid the sentence of dread banishment 
 On yon proud man, should take it off again 
 With words of sooth! O that I were as great 
 As is my grief, or lesser than my name! 
 Or that I could forget what I have been, 
 Or not remember what I must be now! 
 Swell'st thou, proud heart? I'll give thee scope to beat, 
 Since foes have scope to beat both thee and me. 
 DUKE OF AUMERLE  Northumberland comes back from Bolingbroke. 
 KING RICHARD II  What must the king do now? must he submit? 
 The king shall do it: must he be deposed? 
 The king shall be contented: must he lose 
 The name of king? o' God's name, let it go: 
 I'll give my jewels for a set of beads, 
 My gorgeous palace for a hermitage, 
 My gay apparel for an almsman's gown, 
 My figured goblets for a dish of wood, 
 My sceptre for a palmer's walking staff, 
 My subjects for a pair of carved saints 
 And my large kingdom for a little grave, 
 A little little grave, an obscure grave; 
 Or I'll be buried in the king's highway, 
 Some way of common trade, where subjects' feet 
 May hourly trample on their sovereign's head; 
 For on my heart they tread now whilst I live; 
 And buried once, why not upon my head? 
 Aumerle, thou weep'st, my tender-hearted cousin! 
 We'll make foul weather with despised tears; 
 Our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn, 
 And make a dearth in this revolting land. 
 Or shall we play the wantons with our woes, 
 And make some pretty match with shedding tears? 
 As thus, to drop them still upon one place, 
 Till they have fretted us a pair of graves 
 Within the earth; and, therein laid,--there lies 
 Two kinsmen digg'd their graves with weeping eyes. 
 Would not this ill do well? Well, well, I see 
 I talk but idly, and you laugh at me. 
 Most mighty prince, my Lord Northumberland, 
 What says King Bolingbroke? will his majesty 
 Give Richard leave to live till Richard die? 
 You make a leg, and Bolingbroke says ay. 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  My lord, in the base court he doth attend 
 To speak with you; may it please you to come down. 
 KING RICHARD II  Down, down I come; like glistering Phaethon, 
 Wanting the manage of unruly jades. 
 In the base court? Base court, where kings grow base, 
 To come at traitors' calls and do them grace. 
 In the base court? Come down? Down, court! 
 down, king! 
 For night-owls shriek where mounting larks 
 should sing. 

 Exeunt from above  HENRY BOLINGBROKE  What says his majesty? 
 NORTHUMBERLAND  Sorrow and grief of heart 
 Makes him speak fondly, like a frantic man 
 Yet he is come. 

 Enter KING RICHARD and his attendants below  HENRY BOLINGBROKE  Stand all apart, 
 And show fair duty to his majesty. 

 He kneels down  My gracious lord,-- 
 KING RICHARD II  Fair cousin, you debase your princely knee 
 To make the base earth proud with kissing it: 
 Me rather had my heart might feel your love 
 Than my unpleased eye see your courtesy. 
 Up, cousin, up; your heart is up, I know, 
 Thus high at least, although your knee be low. 
 HENRY BOLINGBROKE  My gracious lord, I come but for mine own. 
 KING RICHARD II  Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all. 
 HENRY BOLINGBROKE  So far be mine, my most redoubted lord, 
 As my true service shall deserve your love. 
 KING RICHARD II  Well you deserve: they well deserve to have, 
 That know the strong'st and surest way to get. 
 Uncle, give me your hands: nay, dry your eyes; 
 Tears show their love, but want their remedies. 
 Cousin, I am too young to be your father, 
 Though you are old enough to be my heir. 
 What you will have, I'll give, and willing too; 
 For do we must what force will have us do. 
 Set on towards London, cousin, is it so? 
 HENRY BOLINGBROKE  Yea, my good lord. 
 KING RICHARD II  Then I must not say no. 

 Flourish. Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Richard II  | Act 3, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 