SCENE V. A hall in Capulet's house. Romeo and Juliet  Shakespeare homepage  |  Romeo and Juliet  | Act 1, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE V. A hall in Capulet's house. 
 Musicians waiting. Enter Servingmen with napkins  First Servant  Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away? He 
 shift a trencher? he scrape a trencher! 
 Second Servant  When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's 
 hands and they unwashed too, 'tis a foul thing. 
 First Servant  Away with the joint-stools, remove the 
 court-cupboard, look to the plate. Good thou, save 
 me a piece of marchpane; and, as thou lovest me, let 
 the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell. 
 Antony, and Potpan! 
 Second Servant  Ay, boy, ready. 
 First Servant  You are looked for and called for, asked for and 
 sought for, in the great chamber. 
 Second Servant  We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys; be 
 brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all. 

 Enter CAPULET, with JULIET and others of his house, meeting the Guests and Maskers  CAPULET  Welcome, gentlemen! ladies that have their toes 
 Unplagued with corns will have a bout with you. 
 Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all 
 Will now deny to dance? she that makes dainty, 
 She, I'll swear, hath corns; am I come near ye now? 
 Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day 
 That I have worn a visor and could tell 
 A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear, 
 Such as would please: 'tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone: 
 You are welcome, gentlemen! come, musicians, play. 
 A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls. 

 Music plays, and they dance  More light, you knaves; and turn the tables up, 
 And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot. 
 Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well. 
 Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet; 
 For you and I are past our dancing days: 
 How long is't now since last yourself and I 
 Were in a mask? 
 Second Capulet  By'r lady, thirty years. 
 CAPULET  What, man! 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much: 
 'Tis since the nuptials of Lucentio, 
 Come pentecost as quickly as it will, 
 Some five and twenty years; and then we mask'd. 
 Second Capulet  'Tis more, 'tis more, his son is elder, sir; 
 His son is thirty. 
 CAPULET  Will you tell me that? 
 His son was but a ward two years ago. 
 ROMEO  [To a Servingman]  What lady is that, which doth 
 enrich the hand 
 Of yonder knight? 
 Servant  I know not, sir. 
 ROMEO  O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright! 
 It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night 
 Like a rich jewel in an Ethiope's ear; 
 Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear! 
 So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows, 
 As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows. 
 The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand, 
 And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand. 
 Did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight! 
 For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night. 
 TYBALT  This, by his voice, should be a Montague. 
 Fetch me my rapier, boy. What dares the slave 
 Come hither, cover'd with an antic face, 
 To fleer and scorn at our solemnity? 
 Now, by the stock and honour of my kin, 
 To strike him dead, I hold it not a sin. 
 CAPULET  Why, how now, kinsman! wherefore storm you so? 
 TYBALT  Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe, 
 A villain that is hither come in spite, 
 To scorn at our solemnity this night. 
 CAPULET  Young Romeo is it? 
 TYBALT  'Tis he, that villain Romeo. 
 CAPULET  Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone; 
 He bears him like a portly gentleman; 
 And, to say truth, Verona brags of him 
 To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth: 
 I would not for the wealth of all the town 
 Here in my house do him disparagement: 
 Therefore be patient, take no note of him: 
 It is my will, the which if thou respect, 
 Show a fair presence and put off these frowns, 
 And ill-beseeming semblance for a feast. 
 TYBALT  It fits, when such a villain is a guest: 
 I'll not endure him. 
 CAPULET  He shall be endured: 
 What, goodman boy! I say, he shall: go to; 
 Am I the master here, or you? go to. 
 You'll not endure him! God shall mend my soul! 
 You'll make a mutiny among my guests! 
 You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man! 
 TYBALT  Why, uncle, 'tis a shame. 
 CAPULET  Go to, go to; 
 You are a saucy boy: is't so, indeed? 
 This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what: 
 You must contrary me! marry, 'tis time. 
 Well said, my hearts! You are a princox; go: 
 Be quiet, or--More light, more light! For shame! 
 I'll make you quiet. What, cheerly, my hearts! 
 TYBALT  Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting 
 Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting. 
 I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall 
 Now seeming sweet convert to bitter gall. 

 Exit  ROMEO  [To JULIET]  If I profane with my unworthiest hand 
 This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this: 
 My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand 
 To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss. 
 JULIET  Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much, 
 Which mannerly devotion shows in this; 
 For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch, 
 And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss. 
 ROMEO  Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too? 
 JULIET  Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer. 
 ROMEO  O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do; 
 They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair. 
 JULIET  Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake. 
 ROMEO  Then move not, while my prayer's effect I take. 
 Thus from my lips, by yours, my sin is purged. 
 JULIET  Then have my lips the sin that they have took. 
 ROMEO  Sin from thy lips? O trespass sweetly urged! 
 Give me my sin again. 
 JULIET  You kiss by the book. 
 Nurse  Madam, your mother craves a word with you. 
 ROMEO  What is her mother? 
 Nurse  Marry, bachelor, 
 Her mother is the lady of the house, 
 And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous 
 I nursed her daughter, that you talk'd withal; 
 I tell you, he that can lay hold of her 
 Shall have the chinks. 
 ROMEO  Is she a Capulet? 
 O dear account! my life is my foe's debt. 
 BENVOLIO  Away, begone; the sport is at the best. 
 ROMEO  Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest. 
 CAPULET  Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone; 
 We have a trifling foolish banquet towards. 
 Is it e'en so? why, then, I thank you all 
 I thank you, honest gentlemen; good night. 
 More torches here! Come on then, let's to bed. 
 Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late: 
 I'll to my rest. 

 Exeunt all but JULIET and Nurse  JULIET  Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman? 
 Nurse  The son and heir of old Tiberio. 
 JULIET  What's he that now is going out of door? 
 Nurse  Marry, that, I think, be young Petrucio. 
 JULIET  What's he that follows there, that would not dance? 
 Nurse  I know not. 
 JULIET  Go ask his name: if he be married. 
 My grave is like to be my wedding bed. 
 Nurse  His name is Romeo, and a Montague; 
 The only son of your great enemy. 
 JULIET  My only love sprung from my only hate! 
 Too early seen unknown, and known too late! 
 Prodigious birth of love it is to me, 
 That I must love a loathed enemy. 
 Nurse  What's this? what's this? 
 JULIET  A rhyme I learn'd even now 
 Of one I danced withal. 

 One calls within 'Juliet.'  Nurse  Anon, anon! 
 Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Romeo and Juliet  | Act 1, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 