SCENE II. Hall in Capulet's house. Romeo and Juliet  Shakespeare homepage  |  Romeo and Juliet  | Act 4, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. Hall in Capulet's house. 
 Enter CAPULET, LADY  CAPULET, Nurse, and two Servingmen  CAPULET  So many guests invite as here are writ. 

 Exit First Servant  Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks. 
 Second Servant  You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they 
 can lick their fingers. 
 CAPULET  How canst thou try them so? 
 Second Servant  Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his 
 own fingers: therefore he that cannot lick his 
 fingers goes not with me. 
 CAPULET  Go, be gone. 

 Exit Second Servant  We shall be much unfurnished for this time. 
 What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence? 
 Nurse  Ay, forsooth. 
 CAPULET  Well, he may chance to do some good on her: 
 A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is. 
 Nurse  See where she comes from shrift with merry look. 

 Enter JULIET  CAPULET  How now, my headstrong! where have you been gadding? 
 JULIET  Where I have learn'd me to repent the sin 
 Of disobedient opposition 
 To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd 
 By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here, 
 And beg your pardon: pardon, I beseech you! 
 Henceforward I am ever ruled by you. 
 CAPULET  Send for the county; go tell him of this: 
 I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning. 
 JULIET  I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell; 
 And gave him what becomed love I might, 
 Not step o'er the bounds of modesty. 
 CAPULET  Why, I am glad on't; this is well: stand up: 
 This is as't should be. Let me see the county; 
 Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither. 
 Now, afore God! this reverend holy friar, 
 Our whole city is much bound to him. 
 JULIET  Nurse, will you go with me into my closet, 
 To help me sort such needful ornaments 
 As you think fit to furnish me to-morrow? 
 LADY CAPULET  No, not till Thursday; there is time enough. 
 CAPULET  Go, nurse, go with her: we'll to church to-morrow. 

 Exeunt JULIET and Nurse  LADY  CAPULET  We shall be short in our provision: 
 'Tis now near night. 
 CAPULET  Tush, I will stir about, 
 And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife: 
 Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her; 
 I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone; 
 I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho! 
 They are all forth. Well, I will walk myself 
 To County Paris, to prepare him up 
 Against to-morrow: my heart is wondrous light, 
 Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Romeo and Juliet  | Act 4, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 