SCENE III. A room in Capulet's house. Romeo and Juliet  Shakespeare homepage  |  Romeo and Juliet  | Act 1, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. A room in Capulet's house. 
 Enter LADY CAPULET and Nurse  LADY CAPULET  Nurse, where's my daughter? call her forth to me. 
 Nurse  Now, by my maidenhead, at twelve year old, 
 I bade her come. What, lamb! what, ladybird! 
 God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet! 

 Enter JULIET  JULIET  How now! who calls? 
 Nurse  Your mother. 
 JULIET  Madam, I am here. 
 What is your will? 
 LADY CAPULET  This is the matter:--Nurse, give leave awhile, 
 We must talk in secret:--nurse, come back again; 
 I have remember'd me, thou's hear our counsel. 
 Thou know'st my daughter's of a pretty age. 
 Nurse  Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour. 
 LADY CAPULET  She's not fourteen. 
 Nurse  I'll lay fourteen of my teeth,-- 
 And yet, to my teeth be it spoken, I have but four-- 
 She is not fourteen. How long is it now 
 To Lammas-tide? 
 LADY CAPULET  A fortnight and odd days. 
 Nurse  Even or odd, of all days in the year, 
 Come Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen. 
 Susan and she--God rest all Christian souls!-- 
 Were of an age: well, Susan is with God; 
 She was too good for me: but, as I said, 
 On Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen; 
 That shall she, marry; I remember it well. 
 'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years; 
 And she was wean'd,--I never shall forget it,-- 
 Of all the days of the year, upon that day: 
 For I had then laid wormwood to my dug, 
 Sitting in the sun under the dove-house wall; 
 My lord and you were then at Mantua:-- 
 Nay, I do bear a brain:--but, as I said, 
 When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple 
 Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool, 
 To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug! 
 Shake quoth the dove-house: 'twas no need, I trow, 
 To bid me trudge: 
 And since that time it is eleven years; 
 For then she could stand alone; nay, by the rood, 
 She could have run and waddled all about; 
 For even the day before, she broke her brow: 
 And then my husband--God be with his soul! 
 A' was a merry man--took up the child: 
 'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face? 
 Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit; 
 Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidame, 
 The pretty wretch left crying and said 'Ay.' 
 To see, now, how a jest shall come about! 
 I warrant, an I should live a thousand years, 
 I never should forget it: 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he; 
 And, pretty fool, it stinted and said 'Ay.' 
 LADY CAPULET  Enough of this; I pray thee, hold thy peace. 
 Nurse  Yes, madam: yet I cannot choose but laugh, 
 To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.' 
 And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow 
 A bump as big as a young cockerel's stone; 
 A parlous knock; and it cried bitterly: 
 'Yea,' quoth my husband,'fall'st upon thy face? 
 Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age; 
 Wilt thou not, Jule?' it stinted and said 'Ay.' 
 JULIET  And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I. 
 Nurse  Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace! 
 Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed: 
 An I might live to see thee married once, 
 I have my wish. 
 LADY CAPULET  Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme 
 I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet, 
 How stands your disposition to be married? 
 JULIET  It is an honour that I dream not of. 
 Nurse  An honour! were not I thine only nurse, 
 I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat. 
 LADY CAPULET  Well, think of marriage now; younger than you, 
 Here in Verona, ladies of esteem, 
 Are made already mothers: by my count, 
 I was your mother much upon these years 
 That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief: 
 The valiant Paris seeks you for his love. 
 Nurse  A man, young lady! lady, such a man 
 As all the world--why, he's a man of wax. 
 LADY CAPULET  Verona's summer hath not such a flower. 
 Nurse  Nay, he's a flower; in faith, a very flower. 
 LADY CAPULET  What say you? can you love the gentleman? 
 This night you shall behold him at our feast; 
 Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face, 
 And find delight writ there with beauty's pen; 
 Examine every married lineament, 
 And see how one another lends content 
 And what obscured in this fair volume lies 
 Find written in the margent of his eyes. 
 This precious book of love, this unbound lover, 
 To beautify him, only lacks a cover: 
 The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride 
 For fair without the fair within to hide: 
 That book in many's eyes doth share the glory, 
 That in gold clasps locks in the golden story; 
 So shall you share all that he doth possess, 
 By having him, making yourself no less. 
 Nurse  No less! nay, bigger; women grow by men. 
 LADY CAPULET  Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love? 
 JULIET  I'll look to like, if looking liking move: 
 But no more deep will I endart mine eye 
 Than your consent gives strength to make it fly. 

 Enter a Servant  Servant  Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you 
 called, my young lady asked for, the nurse cursed in 
 the pantry, and every thing in extremity. I must 
 hence to wait; I beseech you, follow straight. 
 LADY CAPULET  We follow thee. 

 Exit Servant  Juliet, the county stays. 
 Nurse  Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Romeo and Juliet  | Act 1, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 