SCENE IV. A room in Capulet's house. Romeo and Juliet  Shakespeare homepage  |  Romeo and Juliet  | Act 3, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE IV. A room in Capulet's house. 
 Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, and PARIS  CAPULET  Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily, 
 That we have had no time to move our daughter: 
 Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly, 
 And so did I:--Well, we were born to die. 
 'Tis very late, she'll not come down to-night: 
 I promise you, but for your company, 
 I would have been a-bed an hour ago. 
 PARIS  These times of woe afford no time to woo. 
 Madam, good night: commend me to your daughter. 
 LADY CAPULET  I will, and know her mind early to-morrow; 
 To-night she is mew'd up to her heaviness. 
 CAPULET  Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender 
 Of my child's love: I think she will be ruled 
 In all respects by me; nay, more, I doubt it not. 
 Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed; 
 Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love; 
 And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next-- 
 But, soft! what day is this? 
 PARIS  Monday, my lord, 
 CAPULET  Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon, 
 O' Thursday let it be: o' Thursday, tell her, 
 She shall be married to this noble earl. 
 Will you be ready? do you like this haste? 
 We'll keep no great ado,--a friend or two; 
 For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late, 
 It may be thought we held him carelessly, 
 Being our kinsman, if we revel much: 
 Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends, 
 And there an end. But what say you to Thursday? 
 PARIS  My lord, I would that Thursday were to-morrow. 
 CAPULET  Well get you gone: o' Thursday be it, then. 
 Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed, 
 Prepare her, wife, against this wedding-day. 
 Farewell, my lord. Light to my chamber, ho! 
 Afore me! it is so very very late, 
 That we may call it early by and by. 
 Good night. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Romeo and Juliet  | Act 3, Scene 4 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 