SCENE V. A public road. The Taming of the Shrew  Shakespeare homepage  |  Taming of the Shrew  | Act 4, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE V. A public road. 
 Enter PETRUCHIO, KATHARINA, HORTENSIO, and Servants  PETRUCHIO  Come on, i' God's name; once more toward our father's. 
 Good Lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon! 
 KATHARINA  The moon! the sun: it is not moonlight now. 
 PETRUCHIO  I say it is the moon that shines so bright. 
 KATHARINA  I know it is the sun that shines so bright. 
 PETRUCHIO  Now, by my mother's son, and that's myself, 
 It shall be moon, or star, or what I list, 
 Or ere I journey to your father's house. 
 Go on, and fetch our horses back again. 
 Evermore cross'd and cross'd; nothing but cross'd! 
 HORTENSIO  Say as he says, or we shall never go. 
 KATHARINA  Forward, I pray, since we have come so far, 
 And be it moon, or sun, or what you please: 
 An if you please to call it a rush-candle, 
 Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me. 
 PETRUCHIO  I say it is the moon. 
 KATHARINA  I know it is the moon. 
 PETRUCHIO  Nay, then you lie: it is the blessed sun. 
 KATHARINA  Then, God be bless'd, it is the blessed sun: 
 But sun it is not, when you say it is not; 
 And the moon changes even as your mind. 
 What you will have it named, even that it is; 
 And so it shall be so for Katharina. 
 HORTENSIO  Petruchio, go thy ways; the field is won. 
 PETRUCHIO  Well, forward, forward! thus the bowl should run, 
 And not unluckily against the bias. 
 But, soft! company is coming here. 

 Enter VINCENTIO 
 To VINCENTIO  Good morrow, gentle mistress: where away? 
 Tell me, sweet Kate, and tell me truly too, 
 Hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman? 
 Such war of white and red within her cheeks! 
 What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty, 
 As those two eyes become that heavenly face? 
 Fair lovely maid, once more good day to thee. 
 Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beauty's sake. 
 HORTENSIO  A' will make the man mad, to make a woman of him. 
 KATHARINA  Young budding virgin, fair and fresh and sweet, 
 Whither away, or where is thy abode? 
 Happy the parents of so fair a child; 
 Happier the man, whom favourable stars 
 Allot thee for his lovely bed-fellow! 
 PETRUCHIO  Why, how now, Kate! I hope thou art not mad: 
 This is a man, old, wrinkled, faded, wither'd, 
 And not a maiden, as thou say'st he is. 
 KATHARINA  Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes, 
 That have been so bedazzled with the sun 
 That everything I look on seemeth green: 
 Now I perceive thou art a reverend father; 
 Pardon, I pray thee, for my mad mistaking. 
 PETRUCHIO  Do, good old grandsire; and withal make known 
 Which way thou travellest: if along with us, 
 We shall be joyful of thy company. 
 VINCENTIO  Fair sir, and you my merry mistress, 
 That with your strange encounter much amazed me, 
 My name is call'd Vincentio; my dwelling Pisa; 
 And bound I am to Padua; there to visit 
 A son of mine, which long I have not seen. 
 PETRUCHIO  What is his name? 
 VINCENTIO  Lucentio, gentle sir. 
 PETRUCHIO  Happily we met; the happier for thy son. 
 And now by law, as well as reverend age, 
 I may entitle thee my loving father: 
 The sister to my wife, this gentlewoman, 
 Thy son by this hath married. Wonder not, 
 Nor be grieved: she is of good esteem, 
 Her dowery wealthy, and of worthy birth; 
 Beside, so qualified as may beseem 
 The spouse of any noble gentleman. 
 Let me embrace with old Vincentio, 
 And wander we to see thy honest son, 
 Who will of thy arrival be full joyous. 
 VINCENTIO  But is it true? or else is it your pleasure, 
 Like pleasant travellers, to break a jest 
 Upon the company you overtake? 
 HORTENSIO  I do assure thee, father, so it is. 
 PETRUCHIO  Come, go along, and see the truth hereof; 
 For our first merriment hath made thee jealous. 

 Exeunt all but HORTENSIO  HORTENSIO  Well, Petruchio, this has put me in heart. 
 Have to my widow! and if she be froward, 
 Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward. 

 Exit  Shakespeare homepage  |  Taming of the Shrew  | Act 4, Scene 5 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 