SCENE I. Padua. A room in BAPTISTA'S house. The Taming of the Shrew  Shakespeare homepage  |  Taming of the Shrew  | Act 2, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. Padua. A room in BAPTISTA'S house. 
 Enter KATHARINA and BIANCA  BIANCA  Good sister, wrong me not, nor wrong yourself, 
 To make a bondmaid and a slave of me; 
 That I disdain: but for these other gawds, 
 Unbind my hands, I'll pull them off myself, 
 Yea, all my raiment, to my petticoat; 
 Or what you will command me will I do, 
 So well I know my duty to my elders. 
 KATHARINA  Of all thy suitors, here I charge thee, tell 
 Whom thou lovest best: see thou dissemble not. 
 BIANCA  Believe me, sister, of all the men alive 
 I never yet beheld that special face 
 Which I could fancy more than any other. 
 KATHARINA  Minion, thou liest. Is't not Hortensio? 
 BIANCA  If you affect him, sister, here I swear 
 I'll plead for you myself, but you shall have 
 him. 
 KATHARINA  O then, belike, you fancy riches more: 
 You will have Gremio to keep you fair. 
 BIANCA  Is it for him you do envy me so? 
 Nay then you jest, and now I well perceive 
 You have but jested with me all this while: 
 I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands. 
 KATHARINA  If that be jest, then all the rest was so. 

 Strikes her 
 Enter BAPTISTA  BAPTISTA  Why, how now, dame! whence grows this insolence? 
 Bianca, stand aside. Poor girl! she weeps. 
 Go ply thy needle; meddle not with her. 
 For shame, thou helding of a devilish spirit, 
 Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee? 
 When did she cross thee with a bitter word? 
 KATHARINA  Her silence flouts me, and I'll be revenged. 

 Flies after BIANCA  BAPTISTA  What, in my sight? Bianca, get thee in. 

 Exit BIANCA  KATHARINA  What, will you not suffer me? Nay, now I see 
 She is your treasure, she must have a husband; 
 I must dance bare-foot on her wedding day 
 And for your love to her lead apes in hell. 
 Talk not to me: I will go sit and weep 
 Till I can find occasion of revenge. 

 Exit  BAPTISTA  Was ever gentleman thus grieved as I? 
 But who comes here? 

 Enter GREMIO, LUCENTIO in the habit of a mean man;  PETRUCHIO, with HORTENSIO as a musician; and TRANIO, with BIONDELLO bearing a lute and books  GREMIO  Good morrow, neighbour Baptista. 
 BAPTISTA  Good morrow, neighbour Gremio. 
 God save you, gentlemen! 
 PETRUCHIO  And you, good sir! Pray, have you not a daughter 
 Call'd Katharina, fair and virtuous? 
 BAPTISTA  I have a daughter, sir, called Katharina. 
 GREMIO  You are too blunt: go to it orderly. 
 PETRUCHIO  You wrong me, Signior Gremio: give me leave. 
 I am a gentleman of Verona, sir, 
 That, hearing of her beauty and her wit, 
 Her affability and bashful modesty, 
 Her wondrous qualities and mild behavior, 
 Am bold to show myself a forward guest 
 Within your house, to make mine eye the witness 
 Of that report which I so oft have heard. 
 And, for an entrance to my entertainment, 
 I do present you with a man of mine, 

 Presenting HORTENSIO  Cunning in music and the mathematics, 
 To instruct her fully in those sciences, 
 Whereof I know she is not ignorant: 
 Accept of him, or else you do me wrong: 
 His name is Licio, born in Mantua. 
 BAPTISTA  You're welcome, sir; and he, for your good sake. 
 But for my daughter Katharina, this I know, 
 She is not for your turn, the more my grief. 
 PETRUCHIO  I see you do not mean to part with her, 
 Or else you like not of my company. 
 BAPTISTA  Mistake me not; I speak but as I find. 
 Whence are you, sir? what may I call your name? 
 PETRUCHIO  Petruchio is my name; Antonio's son, 
 A man well known throughout all Italy. 
 BAPTISTA  I know him well: you are welcome for his sake. 
 GREMIO  Saving your tale, Petruchio, I pray, 
 Let us, that are poor petitioners, speak too: 
 Baccare! you are marvellous forward. 
 PETRUCHIO  O, pardon me, Signior Gremio; I would fain be doing. 
 GREMIO  I doubt it not, sir; but you will curse your 
 wooing. Neighbour, this is a gift very grateful, I am 
 sure of it. To express the like kindness, myself, 
 that have been more kindly beholding to you than 
 any, freely give unto you this young scholar, 

 Presenting LUCENTIO  that hath been long studying at Rheims; as cunning 
 in Greek, Latin, and other languages, as the other 
 in music and mathematics: his name is Cambio; pray, 
 accept his service. 
 BAPTISTA  A thousand thanks, Signior Gremio. 
 Welcome, good Cambio. 

 To TRANIO  But, gentle sir, methinks you walk like a stranger: 
 may I be so bold to know the cause of your coming? 
 TRANIO  Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own, 
 That, being a stranger in this city here, 
 Do make myself a suitor to your daughter, 
 Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous. 
 Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me, 
 In the preferment of the eldest sister. 
 This liberty is all that I request, 
 That, upon knowledge of my parentage, 
 I may have welcome 'mongst the rest that woo 
 And free access and favour as the rest: 
 And, toward the education of your daughters, 
 I here bestow a simple instrument, 
 And this small packet of Greek and Latin books: 
 If you accept them, then their worth is great. 
 BAPTISTA  Lucentio is your name; of whence, I pray? 
 TRANIO  Of Pisa, sir; son to Vincentio. 
 BAPTISTA  A mighty man of Pisa; by report 
 I know him well: you are very welcome, sir, 
 Take you the lute, and you the set of books; 
 You shall go see your pupils presently. 
 Holla, within! 

 Enter a Servant  Sirrah, lead these gentlemen 
 To my daughters; and tell them both, 
 These are their tutors: bid them use them well. 

 Exit Servant, with LUCENTIO and HORTENSIO, BIONDELLO following  We will go walk a little in the orchard, 
 And then to dinner. You are passing welcome, 
 And so I pray you all to think yourselves. 
 PETRUCHIO  Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste, 
 And every day I cannot come to woo. 
 You knew my father well, and in him me, 
 Left solely heir to all his lands and goods, 
 Which I have better'd rather than decreased: 
 Then tell me, if I get your daughter's love, 
 What dowry shall I have with her to wife? 
 BAPTISTA  After my death the one half of my lands, 
 And in possession twenty thousand crowns. 
 PETRUCHIO  And, for that dowry, I'll assure her of 
 Her widowhood, be it that she survive me, 
 In all my lands and leases whatsoever: 
 Let specialties be therefore drawn between us, 
 That covenants may be kept on either hand. 
 BAPTISTA  Ay, when the special thing is well obtain'd, 
 That is, her love; for that is all in all. 
 PETRUCHIO  Why, that is nothing: for I tell you, father, 
 I am as peremptory as she proud-minded; 
 And where two raging fires meet together 
 They do consume the thing that feeds their fury: 
 Though little fire grows great with little wind, 
 Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all: 
 So I to her and so she yields to me; 
 For I am rough and woo not like a babe. 
 BAPTISTA  Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed! 
 But be thou arm'd for some unhappy words. 
 PETRUCHIO  Ay, to the proof; as mountains are for winds, 
 That shake not, though they blow perpetually. 

 Re-enter HORTENSIO, with his head broke  BAPTISTA  How now, my friend! why dost thou look so pale? 
 HORTENSIO  For fear, I promise you, if I look pale. 
 BAPTISTA  What, will my daughter prove a good musician? 
 HORTENSIO  I think she'll sooner prove a soldier 
 Iron may hold with her, but never lutes. 
 BAPTISTA  Why, then thou canst not break her to the lute? 
 HORTENSIO  Why, no; for she hath broke the lute to me. 
 I did but tell her she mistook her frets, 
 And bow'd her hand to teach her fingering; 
 When, with a most impatient devilish spirit, 
 'Frets, call you these?' quoth she; 'I'll fume 
 with them:' 
 And, with that word, she struck me on the head, 
 And through the instrument my pate made way; 
 And there I stood amazed for a while, 
 As on a pillory, looking through the lute; 
 While she did call me rascal fiddler 
 And twangling Jack; with twenty such vile terms, 
 As had she studied to misuse me so. 
 PETRUCHIO  Now, by the world, it is a lusty wench; 
 I love her ten times more than e'er I did: 
 O, how I long to have some chat with her! 
 BAPTISTA  Well, go with me and be not so discomfited: 
 Proceed in practise with my younger daughter; 
 She's apt to learn and thankful for good turns. 
 Signior Petruchio, will you go with us, 
 Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you? 
 PETRUCHIO  I pray you do. 

 Exeunt all but PETRUCHIO  I will attend her here, 
 And woo her with some spirit when she comes. 
 Say that she rail; why then I'll tell her plain 
 She sings as sweetly as a nightingale: 
 Say that she frown, I'll say she looks as clear 
 As morning roses newly wash'd with dew: 
 Say she be mute and will not speak a word; 
 Then I'll commend her volubility, 
 And say she uttereth piercing eloquence: 
 If she do bid me pack, I'll give her thanks, 
 As though she bid me stay by her a week: 
 If she deny to wed, I'll crave the day 
 When I shall ask the banns and when be married. 
 But here she comes; and now, Petruchio, speak. 

 Enter KATHARINA  Good morrow, Kate; for that's your name, I hear. 
 KATHARINA  Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing: 
 They call me Katharina that do talk of me. 
 PETRUCHIO  You lie, in faith; for you are call'd plain Kate, 
 And bonny Kate and sometimes Kate the curst; 
 But Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom 
 Kate of Kate Hall, my super-dainty Kate, 
 For dainties are all Kates, and therefore, Kate, 
 Take this of me, Kate of my consolation; 
 Hearing thy mildness praised in every town, 
 Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded, 
 Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs, 
 Myself am moved to woo thee for my wife. 
 KATHARINA  Moved! in good time: let him that moved you hither 
 Remove you hence: I knew you at the first 
 You were a moveable. 
 PETRUCHIO  Why, what's a moveable? 
 KATHARINA  A join'd-stool. 
 PETRUCHIO  Thou hast hit it: come, sit on me. 
 KATHARINA  Asses are made to bear, and so are you. 
 PETRUCHIO  Women are made to bear, and so are you. 
 KATHARINA  No such jade as you, if me you mean. 
 PETRUCHIO  Alas! good Kate, I will not burden thee; 
 For, knowing thee to be but young and light-- 
 KATHARINA  Too light for such a swain as you to catch; 
 And yet as heavy as my weight should be. 
 PETRUCHIO  Should be! should--buzz! 
 KATHARINA  Well ta'en, and like a buzzard. 
 PETRUCHIO  O slow-wing'd turtle! shall a buzzard take thee? 
 KATHARINA  Ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard. 
 PETRUCHIO  Come, come, you wasp; i' faith, you are too angry. 
 KATHARINA  If I be waspish, best beware my sting. 
 PETRUCHIO  My remedy is then, to pluck it out. 
 KATHARINA  Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies, 
 PETRUCHIO  Who knows not where a wasp does 
 wear his sting? In his tail. 
 KATHARINA  In his tongue. 
 PETRUCHIO  Whose tongue? 
 KATHARINA  Yours, if you talk of tails: and so farewell. 
 PETRUCHIO  What, with my tongue in your tail? nay, come again, 
 Good Kate; I am a gentleman. 
 KATHARINA  That I'll try. 

 She strikes him  PETRUCHIO  I swear I'll cuff you, if you strike again. 
 KATHARINA  So may you lose your arms: 
 If you strike me, you are no gentleman; 
 And if no gentleman, why then no arms. 
 PETRUCHIO  A herald, Kate? O, put me in thy books! 
 KATHARINA  What is your crest? a coxcomb? 
 PETRUCHIO  A combless cock, so Kate will be my hen. 
 KATHARINA  No cock of mine; you crow too like a craven. 
 PETRUCHIO  Nay, come, Kate, come; you must not look so sour. 
 KATHARINA  It is my fashion, when I see a crab. 
 PETRUCHIO  Why, here's no crab; and therefore look not sour. 
 KATHARINA  There is, there is. 
 PETRUCHIO  Then show it me. 
 KATHARINA  Had I a glass, I would. 
 PETRUCHIO  What, you mean my face? 
 KATHARINA  Well aim'd of such a young one. 
 PETRUCHIO  Now, by Saint George, I am too young for you. 
 KATHARINA  Yet you are wither'd. 
 PETRUCHIO  'Tis with cares. 
 KATHARINA  I care not. 
 PETRUCHIO  Nay, hear you, Kate: in sooth you scape not so. 
 KATHARINA  I chafe you, if I tarry: let me go. 
 PETRUCHIO  No, not a whit: I find you passing gentle. 
 'Twas told me you were rough and coy and sullen, 
 And now I find report a very liar; 
 For thou are pleasant, gamesome, passing courteous, 
 But slow in speech, yet sweet as spring-time flowers: 
 Thou canst not frown, thou canst not look askance, 
 Nor bite the lip, as angry wenches will, 
 Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk, 
 But thou with mildness entertain'st thy wooers, 
 With gentle conference, soft and affable. 
 Why does the world report that Kate doth limp? 
 O slanderous world! Kate like the hazel-twig 
 Is straight and slender and as brown in hue 
 As hazel nuts and sweeter than the kernels. 
 O, let me see thee walk: thou dost not halt. 
 KATHARINA  Go, fool, and whom thou keep'st command. 
 PETRUCHIO  Did ever Dian so become a grove 
 As Kate this chamber with her princely gait? 
 O, be thou Dian, and let her be Kate; 
 And then let Kate be chaste and Dian sportful! 
 KATHARINA  Where did you study all this goodly speech? 
 PETRUCHIO  It is extempore, from my mother-wit. 
 KATHARINA  A witty mother! witless else her son. 
 PETRUCHIO  Am I not wise? 
 KATHARINA  Yes; keep you warm. 
 PETRUCHIO  Marry, so I mean, sweet Katharina, in thy bed: 
 And therefore, setting all this chat aside, 
 Thus in plain terms: your father hath consented 
 That you shall be my wife; your dowry 'greed on; 
 And, Will you, nill you, I will marry you. 
 Now, Kate, I am a husband for your turn; 
 For, by this light, whereby I see thy beauty, 
 Thy beauty, that doth make me like thee well, 
 Thou must be married to no man but me; 
 For I am he am born to tame you Kate, 
 And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate 
 Conformable as other household Kates. 
 Here comes your father: never make denial; 
 I must and will have Katharina to my wife. 

 Re-enter BAPTISTA, GREMIO, and TRANIO  BAPTISTA  Now, Signior Petruchio, how speed you with my daughter? 
 PETRUCHIO  How but well, sir? how but well? 
 It were impossible I should speed amiss. 
 BAPTISTA  Why, how now, daughter Katharina! in your dumps? 
 KATHARINA  Call you me daughter? now, I promise you 
 You have show'd a tender fatherly regard, 
 To wish me wed to one half lunatic; 
 A mad-cup ruffian and a swearing Jack, 
 That thinks with oaths to face the matter out. 
 PETRUCHIO  Father, 'tis thus: yourself and all the world, 
 That talk'd of her, have talk'd amiss of her: 
 If she be curst, it is for policy, 
 For she's not froward, but modest as the dove; 
 She is not hot, but temperate as the morn; 
 For patience she will prove a second Grissel, 
 And Roman Lucrece for her chastity: 
 And to conclude, we have 'greed so well together, 
 That upon Sunday is the wedding-day. 
 KATHARINA  I'll see thee hang'd on Sunday first. 
 GREMIO  Hark, Petruchio; she says she'll see thee 
 hang'd first. 
 TRANIO  Is this your speeding? nay, then, good night our part! 
 PETRUCHIO  Be patient, gentlemen; I choose her for myself: 
 If she and I be pleased, what's that to you? 
 'Tis bargain'd 'twixt us twain, being alone, 
 That she shall still be curst in company. 
 I tell you, 'tis incredible to believe 
 How much she loves me: O, the kindest Kate! 
 She hung about my neck; and kiss on kiss 
 She vied so fast, protesting oath on oath, 
 That in a twink she won me to her love. 
 O, you are novices! 'tis a world to see, 
 How tame, when men and women are alone, 
 A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew. 
 Give me thy hand, Kate: I will unto Venice, 
 To buy apparel 'gainst the wedding-day. 
 Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests; 
 I will be sure my Katharina shall be fine. 
 BAPTISTA  I know not what to say: but give me your hands; 
 God send you joy, Petruchio! 'tis a match. 
 GREMIO  TRANIO  Amen, say we: we will be witnesses. 
 PETRUCHIO  Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu; 
 I will to Venice; Sunday comes apace: 
 We will have rings and things and fine array; 
 And kiss me, Kate, we will be married o'Sunday. 

 Exeunt PETRUCHIO and KATHARINA severally  GREMIO  Was ever match clapp'd up so suddenly? 
 BAPTISTA  Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchant's part, 
 And venture madly on a desperate mart. 
 TRANIO  'Twas a commodity lay fretting by you: 
 'Twill bring you gain, or perish on the seas. 
 BAPTISTA  The gain I seek is, quiet in the match. 
 GREMIO  No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch. 
 But now, Baptists, to your younger daughter: 
 Now is the day we long have looked for: 
 I am your neighbour, and was suitor first. 
 TRANIO  And I am one that love Bianca more 
 Than words can witness, or your thoughts can guess. 
 GREMIO  Youngling, thou canst not love so dear as I. 
 TRANIO  Graybeard, thy love doth freeze. 
 GREMIO  But thine doth fry. 
 Skipper, stand back: 'tis age that nourisheth. 
 TRANIO  But youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth. 
 BAPTISTA  Content you, gentlemen: I will compound this strife: 
 'Tis deeds must win the prize; and he of both 
 That can assure my daughter greatest dower 
 Shall have my Bianca's love. 
 Say, Signior Gremio, What can you assure her? 
 GREMIO  First, as you know, my house within the city 
 Is richly furnished with plate and gold; 
 Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands; 
 My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry; 
 In ivory coffers I have stuff'd my crowns; 
 In cypress chests my arras counterpoints, 
 Costly apparel, tents, and canopies, 
 Fine linen, Turkey cushions boss'd with pearl, 
 Valance of Venice gold in needlework, 
 Pewter and brass and all things that belong 
 To house or housekeeping: then, at my farm 
 I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail, 
 Sixscore fat oxen standing in my stalls, 
 And all things answerable to this portion. 
 Myself am struck in years, I must confess; 
 And if I die to-morrow, this is hers, 
 If whilst I live she will be only mine. 
 TRANIO  That 'only' came well in. Sir, list to me: 
 I am my father's heir and only son: 
 If I may have your daughter to my wife, 
 I'll leave her houses three or four as good, 
 Within rich Pisa walls, as any one 
 Old Signior Gremio has in Padua; 
 Besides two thousand ducats by the year 
 Of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointure. 
 What, have I pinch'd you, Signior Gremio? 
 GREMIO  Two thousand ducats by the year of land! 
 My land amounts not to so much in all: 
 That she shall have; besides an argosy 
 That now is lying in Marseilles' road. 
 What, have I choked you with an argosy? 
 TRANIO  Gremio, 'tis known my father hath no less 
 Than three great argosies; besides two galliases, 
 And twelve tight galleys: these I will assure her, 
 And twice as much, whate'er thou offer'st next. 
 GREMIO  Nay, I have offer'd all, I have no more; 
 And she can have no more than all I have: 
 If you like me, she shall have me and mine. 
 TRANIO  Why, then the maid is mine from all the world, 
 By your firm promise: Gremio is out-vied. 
 BAPTISTA  I must confess your offer is the best; 
 And, let your father make her the assurance, 
 She is your own; else, you must pardon me, 
 if you should die before him, where's her dower? 
 TRANIO  That's but a cavil: he is old, I young. 
 GREMIO  And may not young men die, as well as old? 
 BAPTISTA  Well, gentlemen, 
 I am thus resolved: on Sunday next you know 
 My daughter Katharina is to be married: 
 Now, on the Sunday following, shall Bianca 
 Be bride to you, if you this assurance; 
 If not, Signior Gremio: 
 And so, I take my leave, and thank you both. 
 GREMIO  Adieu, good neighbour. 

 Exit BAPTISTA  Now I fear thee not: 
 Sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool 
 To give thee all, and in his waning age 
 Set foot under thy table: tut, a toy! 
 An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy. 

 Exit  TRANIO  A vengeance on your crafty wither'd hide! 
 Yet I have faced it with a card of ten. 
 'Tis in my head to do my master good: 
 I see no reason but supposed Lucentio 
 Must get a father, call'd 'supposed Vincentio;' 
 And that's a wonder: fathers commonly 
 Do get their children; but in this case of wooing, 
 A child shall get a sire, if I fail not of my cunning. 

 Exit  Shakespeare homepage  |  Taming of the Shrew  | Act 2, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 