SCENE II. Another part of the island. The Tempest  Shakespeare homepage  |  The Tempest  | Act 2, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. Another part of the island. 
 Enter CALIBAN with a burden of wood. A noise of thunder heard  CALIBAN  All the infections that the sun sucks up 
 From bogs, fens, flats, on Prosper fall and make him 
 By inch-meal a disease! His spirits hear me 
 And yet I needs must curse. But they'll nor pinch, 
 Fright me with urchin--shows, pitch me i' the mire, 
 Nor lead me, like a firebrand, in the dark 
 Out of my way, unless he bid 'em; but 
 For every trifle are they set upon me; 
 Sometime like apes that mow and chatter at me 
 And after bite me, then like hedgehogs which 
 Lie tumbling in my barefoot way and mount 
 Their pricks at my footfall; sometime am I 
 All wound with adders who with cloven tongues 
 Do hiss me into madness. 

 Enter TRINCULO  Lo, now, lo! 
 Here comes a spirit of his, and to torment me 
 For bringing wood in slowly. I'll fall flat; 
 Perchance he will not mind me. 
 TRINCULO  Here's neither bush nor shrub, to bear off 
 any weather at all, and another storm brewing; 
 I hear it sing i' the wind: yond same black 
 cloud, yond huge one, looks like a foul 
 bombard that would shed his liquor. If it 
 should thunder as it did before, I know not 
 where to hide my head: yond same cloud cannot 
 choose but fall by pailfuls. What have we 
 here? a man or a fish? dead or alive? A fish: 
 he smells like a fish; a very ancient and fish- 
 like smell; a kind of not of the newest Poor- 
 John. A strange fish! Were I in England now, 
 as once I was, and had but this fish painted, 
 not a holiday fool there but would give a piece 
 of silver: there would this monster make a 
 man; any strange beast there makes a man: 
 when they will not give a doit to relieve a lame 
 beggar, they will lazy out ten to see a dead 
 Indian. Legged like a man and his fins like 
 arms! Warm o' my troth! I do now let loose 
 my opinion; hold it no longer: this is no fish, 
 but an islander, that hath lately suffered by a 
 thunderbolt. 

 Thunder  Alas, the storm is come again! my best way is to 
 creep under his gaberdine; there is no other 
 shelter hereabouts: misery acquaints a man with 
 strange bed-fellows. I will here shroud till the 
 dregs of the storm be past. 

 Enter STEPHANO, singing: a bottle in his hand  STEPHANO  I shall no more to sea, to sea, 
 Here shall I die ashore-- 
 This is a very scurvy tune to sing at a man's 
 funeral: well, here's my comfort. 

 Drinks 
 Sings  The master, the swabber, the boatswain and I, 
 The gunner and his mate 
 Loved Mall, Meg and Marian and Margery, 
 But none of us cared for Kate; 
 For she had a tongue with a tang, 
 Would cry to a sailor, Go hang! 
 She loved not the savour of tar nor of pitch, 
 Yet a tailor might scratch her where'er she did itch: 
 Then to sea, boys, and let her go hang! 
 This is a scurvy tune too: but here's my comfort. 

 Drinks  CALIBAN  Do not torment me: Oh! 
 STEPHANO  What's the matter? Have we devils here? Do you put 
 tricks upon's with savages and men of Ind, ha? I 
 have not scaped drowning to be afeard now of your 
 four legs; for it hath been said, As proper a man as 
 ever went on four legs cannot make him give ground; 
 and it shall be said so again while Stephano 
 breathes at's nostrils. 
 CALIBAN  The spirit torments me; Oh! 
 STEPHANO  This is some monster of the isle with four legs, who 
 hath got, as I take it, an ague. Where the devil 
 should he learn our language? I will give him some 
 relief, if it be but for that. if I can recover him 
 and keep him tame and get to Naples with him, he's a 
 present for any emperor that ever trod on neat's leather. 
 CALIBAN  Do not torment me, prithee; I'll bring my wood home faster. 
 STEPHANO  He's in his fit now and does not talk after the 
 wisest. He shall taste of my bottle: if he have 
 never drunk wine afore will go near to remove his 
 fit. If I can recover him and keep him tame, I will 
 not take too much for him; he shall pay for him that 
 hath him, and that soundly. 
 CALIBAN  Thou dost me yet but little hurt; thou wilt anon, I 
 know it by thy trembling: now Prosper works upon thee. 
 STEPHANO  Come on your ways; open your mouth; here is that 
 which will give language to you, cat: open your 
 mouth; this will shake your shaking, I can tell you, 
 and that soundly: you cannot tell who's your friend: 
 open your chaps again. 
 TRINCULO  I should know that voice: it should be--but he is 
 drowned; and these are devils: O defend me! 
 STEPHANO  Four legs and two voices: a most delicate monster! 
 His forward voice now is to speak well of his 
 friend; his backward voice is to utter foul speeches 
 and to detract. If all the wine in my bottle will 
 recover him, I will help his ague. Come. Amen! I 
 will pour some in thy other mouth. 
 TRINCULO  Stephano! 
 STEPHANO  Doth thy other mouth call me? Mercy, mercy! This is 
 a devil, and no monster: I will leave him; I have no 
 long spoon. 
 TRINCULO  Stephano! If thou beest Stephano, touch me and 
 speak to me: for I am Trinculo--be not afeard--thy 
 good friend Trinculo. 
 STEPHANO  If thou beest Trinculo, come forth: I'll pull thee 
 by the lesser legs: if any be Trinculo's legs, 
 these are they. Thou art very Trinculo indeed! How 
 camest thou to be the siege of this moon-calf? can 
 he vent Trinculos? 
 TRINCULO  I took him to be killed with a thunder-stroke. But 
 art thou not drowned, Stephano? I hope now thou art 
 not drowned. Is the storm overblown? I hid me 
 under the dead moon-calf's gaberdine for fear of 
 the storm. And art thou living, Stephano? O 
 Stephano, two Neapolitans 'scaped! 
 STEPHANO  Prithee, do not turn me about; my stomach is not constant. 
 CALIBAN  [Aside]  These be fine things, an if they be 
 not sprites. 
 That's a brave god and bears celestial liquor. 
 I will kneel to him. 
 STEPHANO  How didst thou 'scape? How camest thou hither? 
 swear by this bottle how thou camest hither. I 
 escaped upon a butt of sack which the sailors 
 heaved o'erboard, by this bottle; which I made of 
 the bark of a tree with mine own hands since I was 
 cast ashore. 
 CALIBAN  I'll swear upon that bottle to be thy true subject; 
 for the liquor is not earthly. 
 STEPHANO  Here; swear then how thou escapedst. 
 TRINCULO  Swum ashore. man, like a duck: I can swim like a 
 duck, I'll be sworn. 
 STEPHANO  Here, kiss the book. Though thou canst swim like a 
 duck, thou art made like a goose. 
 TRINCULO  O Stephano. hast any more of this? 
 STEPHANO  The whole butt, man: my cellar is in a rock by the 
 sea-side where my wine is hid. How now, moon-calf! 
 how does thine ague? 
 CALIBAN  Hast thou not dropp'd from heaven? 
 STEPHANO  Out o' the moon, I do assure thee: I was the man i' 
 the moon when time was. 
 CALIBAN  I have seen thee in her and I do adore thee: 
 My mistress show'd me thee and thy dog and thy bush. 
 STEPHANO  Come, swear to that; kiss the book: I will furnish 
 it anon with new contents swear. 
 TRINCULO  By this good light, this is a very shallow monster! 
 I afeard of him! A very weak monster! The man i' 
 the moon! A most poor credulous monster! Well 
 drawn, monster, in good sooth! 
 CALIBAN  I'll show thee every fertile inch o' th' island; 
 And I will kiss thy foot: I prithee, be my god. 
 TRINCULO  By this light, a most perfidious and drunken 
 monster! when 's god's asleep, he'll rob his bottle. 
 CALIBAN  I'll kiss thy foot; I'll swear myself thy subject. 
 STEPHANO  Come on then; down, and swear. 
 TRINCULO  I shall laugh myself to death at this puppy-headed 
 monster. A most scurvy monster! I could find in my 
 heart to beat him,-- 
 STEPHANO  Come, kiss. 
 TRINCULO  But that the poor monster's in drink: an abominable monster! 
 CALIBAN  I'll show thee the best springs; I'll pluck thee berries; 
 I'll fish for thee and get thee wood enough. 
 A plague upon the tyrant that I serve! 
 I'll bear him no more sticks, but follow thee, 
 Thou wondrous man. 
 TRINCULO  A most ridiculous monster, to make a wonder of a 
 Poor drunkard! 
 CALIBAN  I prithee, let me bring thee where crabs grow; 
 And I with my long nails will dig thee pignuts; 
 Show thee a jay's nest and instruct thee how 
 To snare the nimble marmoset; I'll bring thee 
 To clustering filberts and sometimes I'll get thee 
 Young scamels from the rock. Wilt thou go with me? 
 STEPHANO  I prithee now, lead the way without any more 
 talking. Trinculo, the king and all our company 
 else being drowned, we will inherit here: here; 
 bear my bottle: fellow Trinculo, we'll fill him by 
 and by again. 
 CALIBAN  [Sings drunkenly] 
 Farewell master; farewell, farewell! 
 TRINCULO  A howling monster: a drunken monster! 
 CALIBAN  No more dams I'll make for fish 
 Nor fetch in firing 
 At requiring; 
 Nor scrape trencher, nor wash dish 
 'Ban, 'Ban, Cacaliban 
 Has a new master: get a new man. 
 Freedom, hey-day! hey-day, freedom! freedom, 
 hey-day, freedom! 
 STEPHANO  O brave monster! Lead the way. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  The Tempest  | Act 2, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 