SCENE VI. The same. A banqueting-room in Timon's house. Timon of Athens  Shakespeare homepage  |  Timon of Athens  | Act 3, Scene 6 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE VI. The same. A banqueting-room in Timon's house. 
 Music. Tables set out: Servants attending.  Enter divers Lords, Senators and others, at several doors  First Lord  The good time of day to you, sir. 
 Second Lord  I also wish it to you. I think this honourable lord 
 did but try us this other day. 
 First Lord  Upon that were my thoughts tiring, when we 
 encountered: I hope it is not so low with him as 
 he made it seem in the trial of his several friends. 
 Second Lord  It should not be, by the persuasion of his new feasting. 
 First Lord  I should think so: he hath sent me an earnest 
 inviting, which many my near occasions did urge me 
 to put off; but he hath conjured me beyond them, and 
 I must needs appear. 
 Second Lord  In like manner was I in debt to my importunate 
 business, but he would not hear my excuse. I am 
 sorry, when he sent to borrow of me, that my 
 provision was out. 
 First Lord  I am sick of that grief too, as I understand how all 
 things go. 
 Second Lord  Every man here's so. What would he have borrowed of 
 you? 
 First Lord  A thousand pieces. 
 Second Lord  A thousand pieces! 
 First Lord  What of you? 
 Second Lord  He sent to me, sir,--Here he comes. 

 Enter TIMON and Attendants  TIMON  With all my heart, gentlemen both; and how fare you? 
 First Lord  Ever at the best, hearing well of your lordship. 
 Second Lord  The swallow follows not summer more willing than we 
 your lordship. 
 TIMON  [Aside]  Nor more willingly leaves winter; such 
 summer-birds are men. Gentlemen, our dinner will not 
 recompense this long stay: feast your ears with the 
 music awhile, if they will fare so harshly o' the 
 trumpet's sound; we shall to 't presently. 
 First Lord  I hope it remains not unkindly with your lordship 
 that I returned you an empty messenger. 
 TIMON  O, sir, let it not trouble you. 
 Second Lord  My noble lord,-- 
 TIMON  Ah, my good friend, what cheer? 
 Second Lord  My most honourable lord, I am e'en sick of shame, 
 that, when your lordship this other day sent to me, 
 I was so unfortunate a beggar. 
 TIMON  Think not on 't, sir. 
 Second Lord  If you had sent but two hours before,-- 
 TIMON  Let it not cumber your better remembrance. 

 The banquet brought in  Come, bring in all together. 
 Second Lord  All covered dishes! 
 First Lord  Royal cheer, I warrant you. 
 Third Lord  Doubt not that, if money and the season can yield 
 it. 
 First Lord  How do you? What's the news? 
 Third Lord  Alcibiades is banished: hear you of it? 
 First Lord  Second Lord  Alcibiades banished! 
 Third Lord  'Tis so, be sure of it. 
 First Lord  How! how! 
 Second Lord  I pray you, upon what? 
 TIMON  My worthy friends, will you draw near? 
 Third Lord  I'll tell you more anon. Here's a noble feast toward. 
 Second Lord  This is the old man still. 
 Third Lord  Will 't hold? will 't hold? 
 Second Lord  It does: but time will--and so-- 
 Third Lord  I do conceive. 
 TIMON  Each man to his stool, with that spur as he would to 
 the lip of his mistress: your diet shall be in all 
 places alike. Make not a city feast of it, to let 
 the meat cool ere we can agree upon the first place: 
 sit, sit. The gods require our thanks. 
 You great benefactors, sprinkle our society with 
 thankfulness. For your own gifts, make yourselves 
 praised: but reserve still to give, lest your 
 deities be despised. Lend to each man enough, that 
 one need not lend to another; for, were your 
 godheads to borrow of men, men would forsake the 
 gods. Make the meat be beloved more than the man 
 that gives it. Let no assembly of twenty be without 
 a score of villains: if there sit twelve women at 
 the table, let a dozen of them be--as they are. The 
 rest of your fees, O gods--the senators of Athens, 
 together with the common lag of people--what is 
 amiss in them, you gods, make suitable for 
 destruction. For these my present friends, as they 
 are to me nothing, so in nothing bless them, and to 
 nothing are they welcome. 
 Uncover, dogs, and lap. 

 The dishes are uncovered and seen to be full of warm water  Some Speak  What does his lordship mean? 
 Some Others  I know not. 
 TIMON  May you a better feast never behold, 
 You knot of mouth-friends I smoke and lukewarm water 
 Is your perfection. This is Timon's last; 
 Who, stuck and spangled with your flatteries, 
 Washes it off, and sprinkles in your faces 
 Your reeking villany. 

 Throwing the water in their faces  Live loathed and long, 
 Most smiling, smooth, detested parasites, 
 Courteous destroyers, affable wolves, meek bears, 
 You fools of fortune, trencher-friends, time's flies, 
 Cap and knee slaves, vapours, and minute-jacks! 
 Of man and beast the infinite malady 
 Crust you quite o'er! What, dost thou go? 
 Soft! take thy physic first--thou too--and thou;-- 
 Stay, I will lend thee money, borrow none. 

 Throws the dishes at them, and drives them out  What, all in motion? Henceforth be no feast, 
 Whereat a villain's not a welcome guest. 
 Burn, house! sink, Athens! henceforth hated be 
 Of Timon man and all humanity! 

 Exit 
 Re-enter the Lords, Senators,  & c  First Lord  How now, my lords! 
 Second Lord  Know you the quality of Lord Timon's fury? 
 Third Lord  Push! did you see my cap? 
 Fourth Lord  I have lost my gown. 
 First Lord  He's but a mad lord, and nought but humour sways him. 
 He gave me a jewel th' other day, and now he has 
 beat it out of my hat: did you see my jewel? 
 Third Lord  Did you see my cap? 
 Second Lord  Here 'tis. 
 Fourth Lord  Here lies my gown. 
 First Lord  Let's make no stay. 
 Second Lord  Lord Timon's mad. 
 Third Lord  I feel 't upon my bones. 
 Fourth Lord  One day he gives us diamonds, next day stones. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Timon of Athens  | Act 3, Scene 6 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 