SCENE II. The same. A room in the palace. Titus Andronicus  Shakespeare homepage  |  Titus Andronicus  | Act 4, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. The same. A room in the palace. 
 Enter, from one side, AARON, DEMETRIUS, and  CHIRON; from the other side, Young LUCIUS, and an  Attendant, with a bundle of weapons, and verses writ upon them  CHIRON  Demetrius, here's the son of Lucius; 
 He hath some message to deliver us. 
 AARON  Ay, some mad message from his mad grandfather. 
 Young LUCIUS  My lords, with all the humbleness I may, 
 I greet your honours from Andronicus. 

 Aside  And pray the Roman gods confound you both! 
 DEMETRIUS  Gramercy, lovely Lucius: what's the news? 
 Young LUCIUS  [Aside]  That you are both decipher'd, that's the news, 
 For villains mark'd with rape.--May it please you, 
 My grandsire, well advised, hath sent by me 
 The goodliest weapons of his armoury 
 To gratify your honourable youth, 
 The hope of Rome; for so he bade me say; 
 And so I do, and with his gifts present 
 Your lordships, that, whenever you have need, 
 You may be armed and appointed well: 
 And so I leave you both: 

 Aside  like bloody villains. 

 Exeunt Young LUCIUS, and Attendant  DEMETRIUS  What's here? A scroll; and written round about? 
 Let's see; 

 Reads  'Integer vitae, scelerisque purus, 
 Non eget Mauri jaculis, nec arcu.' 
 CHIRON  O, 'tis a verse in Horace; I know it well: 
 I read it in the grammar long ago. 
 AARON  Ay, just; a verse in Horace; right, you have it. 

 Aside  Now, what a thing it is to be an ass! 
 Here's no sound jest! the old man hath found their guilt; 
 And sends them weapons wrapped about with lines, 
 That wound, beyond their feeling, to the quick. 
 But were our witty empress well afoot, 
 She would applaud Andronicus' conceit: 
 But let her rest in her unrest awhile. 
 And now, young lords, was't not a happy star 
 Led us to Rome, strangers, and more than so, 
 Captives, to be advanced to this height? 
 It did me good, before the palace gate 
 To brave the tribune in his brother's hearing. 
 DEMETRIUS  But me more good, to see so great a lord 
 Basely insinuate and send us gifts. 
 AARON  Had he not reason, Lord Demetrius? 
 Did you not use his daughter very friendly? 
 DEMETRIUS  I would we had a thousand Roman dames 
 At such a bay, by turn to serve our lust. 
 CHIRON  A charitable wish and full of love. 
 AARON  Here lacks but your mother for to say amen. 
 CHIRON  And that would she for twenty thousand more. 
 DEMETRIUS  Come, let us go; and pray to all the gods 
 For our beloved mother in her pains. 
 AARON  [Aside]  Pray to the devils; the gods have given us over. 

 Trumpets sound within  DEMETRIUS  Why do the emperor's trumpets flourish thus? 
 CHIRON  Belike, for joy the emperor hath a son. 
 DEMETRIUS  Soft! who comes here? 

 Enter a Nurse, with a blackamoor Child in her arms  Nurse  Good morr ow, lords: 
 O, tell me, did you see Aaron the Moor? 
 AARON  Well, more or less, or ne'er a whit at all, 
 Here Aaron is; and what with Aaron now? 
 Nurse  O gentle Aaron, we are all undone! 
 Now help, or woe betide thee evermore! 
 AARON  Why, what a caterwauling dost thou keep! 
 What dost thou wrap and fumble in thine arms? 
 Nurse  O, that which I would hide from heaven's eye, 
 Our empress' shame, and stately Rome's disgrace! 
 She is deliver'd, lords; she is deliver'd. 
 AARON  To whom? 
 Nurse  I mean, she is brought a-bed. 
 AARON  Well, God give her good rest! What hath he sent her? 
 Nurse  A devil. 
 AARON  Why, then she is the devil's dam; a joyful issue. 
 Nurse  A joyless, dismal, black, and sorrowful issue: 
 Here is the babe, as loathsome as a toad 
 Amongst the fairest breeders of our clime: 
 The empress sends it thee, thy stamp, thy seal, 
 And bids thee christen it with thy dagger's point. 
 AARON  'Zounds, ye whore! is black so base a hue? 
 Sweet blowse, you are a beauteous blossom, sure. 
 DEMETRIUS  Villain, what hast thou done? 
 AARON  That which thou canst not undo. 
 CHIRON  Thou hast undone our mother. 
 AARON  Villain, I have done thy mother. 
 DEMETRIUS  And therein, hellish dog, thou hast undone. 
 Woe to her chance, and damn'd her loathed choice! 
 Accursed the offspring of so foul a fiend! 
 CHIRON  It shall not live. 
 AARON  It shall not die. 
 Nurse  Aaron, it must; the mother wills it so. 
 AARON  What, must it, nurse? then let no man but I 
 Do execution on my flesh and blood. 
 DEMETRIUS  I'll broach the tadpole on my rapier's point: 
 Nurse, give it me; my sword shall soon dispatch it. 
 AARON  Sooner this sword shall plough thy bowels up. 

 Takes the Child from the Nurse, and draws  Stay, murderous villains! will you kill your brother? 
 Now, by the burning tapers of the sky, 
 That shone so brightly when this boy was got, 
 He dies upon my scimitar's sharp point 
 That touches this my first-born son and heir! 
 I tell you, younglings, not Enceladus, 
 With all his threatening band of Typhon's brood, 
 Nor great Alcides, nor the god of war, 
 Shall seize this prey out of his father's hands. 
 What, what, ye sanguine, shallow-hearted boys! 
 Ye white-limed walls! ye alehouse painted signs! 
 Coal-black is better than another hue, 
 In that it scorns to bear another hue; 
 For all the water in the ocean 
 Can never turn the swan's black legs to white, 
 Although she lave them hourly in the flood. 
 Tell the empress from me, I am of age 
 To keep mine own, excuse it how she can. 
 DEMETRIUS  Wilt thou betray thy noble mistress thus? 
 AARON  My mistress is my mistress; this myself, 
 The vigour and the picture of my youth: 
 This before all the world do I prefer; 
 This maugre all the world will I keep safe, 
 Or some of you shall smoke for it in Rome. 
 DEMETRIUS  By this our mother is forever shamed. 
 CHIRON  Rome will despise her for this foul escape. 
 Nurse  The emperor, in his rage, will doom her death. 
 CHIRON  I blush to think upon this ignomy. 
 AARON  Why, there's the privilege your beauty bears: 
 Fie, treacherous hue, that will betray with blushing 
 The close enacts and counsels of the heart! 
 Here's a young lad framed of another leer: 
 Look, how the black slave smiles upon the father, 
 As who should say 'Old lad, I am thine own.' 
 He is your brother, lords, sensibly fed 
 Of that self-blood that first gave life to you, 
 And from that womb where you imprison'd were 
 He is enfranchised and come to light: 
 Nay, he is your brother by the surer side, 
 Although my seal be stamped in his face. 
 Nurse  Aaron, what shall I say unto the empress? 
 DEMETRIUS  Advise thee, Aaron, what is to be done, 
 And we will all subscribe to thy advice: 
 Save thou the child, so we may all be safe. 
 AARON  Then sit we down, and let us all consult. 
 My son and I will have the wind of you: 
 Keep there: now talk at pleasure of your safety. 

 They sit  DEMETRIUS  How many women saw this child of his? 
 AARON  Why, so, brave lords! when we join in league, 
 I am a lamb: but if you brave the Moor, 
 The chafed boar, the mountain lioness, 
 The ocean swells not so as Aaron storms. 
 But say, again; how many saw the child? 
 Nurse  Cornelia the midwife and myself; 
 And no one else but the deliver'd empress. 
 AARON  The empress, the midwife, and yourself: 
 Two may keep counsel when the third's away: 
 Go to the empress, tell her this I said. 

 He kills the nurse  Weke, weke! so cries a pig prepared to the spit. 
 DEMETRIUS  What mean'st thou, Aaron? wherefore didst thou this? 
 AARON  O Lord, sir, 'tis a deed of policy: 
 Shall she live to betray this guilt of ours, 
 A long-tongued babbling gossip? no, lords, no: 
 And now be it known to you my full intent. 
 Not far, one Muli lives, my countryman; 
 His wife but yesternight was brought to bed; 
 His child is like to her, fair as you are: 
 Go pack with him, and give the mother gold, 
 And tell them both the circumstance of all; 
 And how by this their child shall be advanced, 
 And be received for the emperor's heir, 
 And substituted in the place of mine, 
 To calm this tempest whirling in the court; 
 And let the emperor dandle him for his own. 
 Hark ye, lords; ye see I have given her physic, 

 Pointing to the nurse  And you must needs bestow her funeral; 
 The fields are near, and you are gallant grooms: 
 This done, see that you take no longer days, 
 But send the midwife presently to me. 
 The midwife and the nurse well made away, 
 Then let the ladies tattle what they please. 
 CHIRON  Aaron, I see thou wilt not trust the air 
 With secrets. 
 DEMETRIUS  For this care of Tamora, 
 Herself and hers are highly bound to thee. 

 Exeunt DEMETRIUS and CHIRON bearing off the Nurse's body  AARON  Now to the Goths, as swift as swallow flies; 
 There to dispose this treasure in mine arms, 
 And secretly to greet the empress' friends. 
 Come on, you thick lipp'd slave, I'll bear you hence; 
 For it is you that puts us to our shifts: 
 I'll make you feed on berries and on roots, 
 And feed on curds and whey, and suck the goat, 
 And cabin in a cave, and bring you up 
 To be a warrior, and command a camp. 

 Exit  Shakespeare homepage  |  Titus Andronicus  | Act 4, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 