SCENE III. A street. Twelfth Night  Shakespeare homepage  |  Twelfth Night  | Act 3, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. A street. 
 Enter SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO  SEBASTIAN  I would not by my will have troubled you; 
 But, since you make your pleasure of your pains, 
 I will no further chide you. 
 ANTONIO  I could not stay behind you: my desire, 
 More sharp than filed steel, did spur me forth; 
 And not all love to see you, though so much 
 As might have drawn one to a longer voyage, 
 But jealousy what might befall your travel, 
 Being skilless in these parts; which to a stranger, 
 Unguided and unfriended, often prove 
 Rough and unhospitable: my willing love, 
 The rather by these arguments of fear, 
 Set forth in your pursuit. 
 SEBASTIAN  My kind Antonio, 
 I can no other answer make but thanks, 
 And thanks; and ever [         ] oft good turns 
 Are shuffled off with such uncurrent pay: 
 But, were my worth as is my conscience firm, 
 You should find better dealing. What's to do? 
 Shall we go see the reliques of this town? 
 ANTONIO  To-morrow, sir: best first go see your lodging. 
 SEBASTIAN  I am not weary, and 'tis long to night: 
 I pray you, let us satisfy our eyes 
 With the memorials and the things of fame 
 That do renown this city. 
 ANTONIO  Would you'ld pardon me; 
 I do not without danger walk these streets: 
 Once, in a sea-fight, 'gainst the count his galleys 
 I did some service; of such note indeed, 
 That were I ta'en here it would scarce be answer'd. 
 SEBASTIAN  Belike you slew great number of his people. 
 ANTONIO  The offence is not of such a bloody nature; 
 Albeit the quality of the time and quarrel 
 Might well have given us bloody argument. 
 It might have since been answer'd in repaying 
 What we took from them; which, for traffic's sake, 
 Most of our city did: only myself stood out; 
 For which, if I be lapsed in this place, 
 I shall pay dear. 
 SEBASTIAN  Do not then walk too open. 
 ANTONIO  It doth not fit me. Hold, sir, here's my purse. 
 In the south suburbs, at the Elephant, 
 Is best to lodge: I will bespeak our diet, 
 Whiles you beguile the time and feed your knowledge 
 With viewing of the town: there shall you have me. 
 SEBASTIAN  Why I your purse? 
 ANTONIO  Haply your eye shall light upon some toy 
 You have desire to purchase; and your store, 
 I think, is not for idle markets, sir. 
 SEBASTIAN  I'll be your purse-bearer and leave you 
 For an hour. 
 ANTONIO  To the Elephant. 
 SEBASTIAN  I do remember. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Twelfth Night  | Act 3, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 