SCENE III. OLIVIA's garden. Twelfth Night  Shakespeare homepage  |  Twelfth Night  | Act 4, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. OLIVIA's garden. 
 Enter SEBASTIAN  SEBASTIAN  This is the air; that is the glorious sun; 
 This pearl she gave me, I do feel't and see't; 
 And though 'tis wonder that enwraps me thus, 
 Yet 'tis not madness. Where's Antonio, then? 
 I could not find him at the Elephant: 
 Yet there he was; and there I found this credit, 
 That he did range the town to seek me out. 
 His counsel now might do me golden service; 
 For though my soul disputes well with my sense, 
 That this may be some error, but no madness, 
 Yet doth this accident and flood of fortune 
 So far exceed all instance, all discourse, 
 That I am ready to distrust mine eyes 
 And wrangle with my reason that persuades me 
 To any other trust but that I am mad 
 Or else the lady's mad; yet, if 'twere so, 
 She could not sway her house, command her followers, 
 Take and give back affairs and their dispatch 
 With such a smooth, discreet and stable bearing 
 As I perceive she does: there's something in't 
 That is deceiveable. But here the lady comes. 

 Enter OLIVIA and Priest  OLIVIA  Blame not this haste of mine. If you mean well, 
 Now go with me and with this holy man 
 Into the chantry by: there, before him, 
 And underneath that consecrated roof, 
 Plight me the full assurance of your faith; 
 That my most jealous and too doubtful soul 
 May live at peace. He shall conceal it 
 Whiles you are willing it shall come to note, 
 What time we will our celebration keep 
 According to my birth. What do you say? 
 SEBASTIAN  I'll follow this good man, and go with you; 
 And, having sworn truth, ever will be true. 
 OLIVIA  Then lead the way, good father; and heavens so shine, 
 That they may fairly note this act of mine! 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Twelfth Night  | Act 4, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 