SCENE II. The sea-coast. Twelfth Night  Shakespeare homepage  |  Twelfth Night  | Act 1, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. The sea-coast. 
 Enter VIOLA, a Captain, and Sailors  VIOLA  What country, friends, is this? 
 Captain  This is Illyria, lady. 
 VIOLA  And what should I do in Illyria? 
 My brother he is in Elysium. 
 Perchance he is not drown'd: what think you, sailors? 
 Captain  It is perchance that you yourself were saved. 
 VIOLA  O my poor brother! and so perchance may he be. 
 Captain  True, madam: and, to comfort you with chance, 
 Assure yourself, after our ship did split, 
 When you and those poor number saved with you 
 Hung on our driving boat, I saw your brother, 
 Most provident in peril, bind himself, 
 Courage and hope both teaching him the practise, 
 To a strong mast that lived upon the sea; 
 Where, like Arion on the dolphin's back, 
 I saw him hold acquaintance with the waves 
 So long as I could see. 
 VIOLA  For saying so, there's gold: 
 Mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope, 
 Whereto thy speech serves for authority, 
 The like of him. Know'st thou this country? 
 Captain  Ay, madam, well; for I was bred and born 
 Not three hours' travel from this very place. 
 VIOLA  Who governs here? 
 Captain  A noble duke, in nature as in name. 
 VIOLA  What is the name? 
 Captain  Orsino. 
 VIOLA  Orsino! I have heard my father name him: 
 He was a bachelor then. 
 Captain  And so is now, or was so very late; 
 For but a month ago I went from hence, 
 And then 'twas fresh in murmur,--as, you know, 
 What great ones do the less will prattle of,-- 
 That he did seek the love of fair Olivia. 
 VIOLA  What's she? 
 Captain  A virtuous maid, the daughter of a count 
 That died some twelvemonth since, then leaving her 
 In the protection of his son, her brother, 
 Who shortly also died: for whose dear love, 
 They say, she hath abjured the company 
 And sight of men. 
 VIOLA  O that I served that lady 
 And might not be delivered to the world, 
 Till I had made mine own occasion mellow, 
 What my estate is! 
 Captain  That were hard to compass; 
 Because she will admit no kind of suit, 
 No, not the duke's. 
 VIOLA  There is a fair behavior in thee, captain; 
 And though that nature with a beauteous wall 
 Doth oft close in pollution, yet of thee 
 I will believe thou hast a mind that suits 
 With this thy fair and outward character. 
 I prithee, and I'll pay thee bounteously, 
 Conceal me what I am, and be my aid 
 For such disguise as haply shall become 
 The form of my intent. I'll serve this duke: 
 Thou shall present me as an eunuch to him: 
 It may be worth thy pains; for I can sing 
 And speak to him in many sorts of music 
 That will allow me very worth his service. 
 What else may hap to time I will commit; 
 Only shape thou thy silence to my wit. 
 Captain  Be you his eunuch, and your mute I'll be: 
 When my tongue blabs, then let mine eyes not see. 
 VIOLA  I thank thee: lead me on. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Twelfth Night  | Act 1, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 