SCENE III. The same. A street. Two Gentlemen of Verona  Shakespeare homepage  |  Two Gentlemen of Verona  | Act 2, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. The same. A street. 
 Enter LAUNCE, leading a dog  LAUNCE  Nay, 'twill be this hour ere I have done weeping; 
 all the kind of the Launces have this very fault. I 
 have received my proportion, like the prodigious 
 son, and am going with Sir Proteus to the Imperial's 
 court. I think Crab, my dog, be the sourest-natured 
 dog that lives: my mother weeping, my father 
 wailing, my sister crying, our maid howling, our cat 
 wringing her hands, and all our house in a great 
 perplexity, yet did not this cruel-hearted cur shed 
 one tear: he is a stone, a very pebble stone, and 
 has no more pity in him than a dog: a Jew would have 
 wept to have seen our parting; why, my grandam, 
 having no eyes, look you, wept herself blind at my 
 parting. Nay, I'll show you the manner of it. This 
 shoe is my father: no, this left shoe is my father: 
 no, no, this left shoe is my mother: nay, that 
 cannot be so neither: yes, it is so, it is so, it 
 hath the worser sole. This shoe, with the hole in 
 it, is my mother, and this my father; a vengeance 
 on't! there 'tis: now, sit, this staff is my 
 sister, for, look you, she is as white as a lily and 
 as small as a wand: this hat is Nan, our maid: I 
 am the dog: no, the dog is himself, and I am the 
 dog--Oh! the dog is me, and I am myself; ay, so, 
 so. Now come I to my father; Father, your blessing: 
 now should not the shoe speak a word for weeping: 
 now should I kiss my father; well, he weeps on. Now 
 come I to my mother: O, that she could speak now 
 like a wood woman! Well, I kiss her; why, there 
 'tis; here's my mother's breath up and down. Now 
 come I to my sister; mark the moan she makes. Now 
 the dog all this while sheds not a tear nor speaks a 
 word; but see how I lay the dust with my tears. 

 Enter PANTHINO  PANTHINO  Launce, away, away, aboard! thy master is shipped 
 and thou art to post after with oars. What's the 
 matter? why weepest thou, man? Away, ass! You'll 
 lose the tide, if you tarry any longer. 
 LAUNCE  It is no matter if the tied were lost; for it is the 
 unkindest tied that ever any man tied. 
 PANTHINO  What's the unkindest tide? 
 LAUNCE  Why, he that's tied here, Crab, my dog. 
 PANTHINO  Tut, man, I mean thou'lt lose the flood, and, in 
 losing the flood, lose thy voyage, and, in losing 
 thy voyage, lose thy master, and, in losing thy 
 master, lose thy service, and, in losing thy 
 service,--Why dost thou stop my mouth? 
 LAUNCE  For fear thou shouldst lose thy tongue. 
 PANTHINO  Where should I lose my tongue? 
 LAUNCE  In thy tale. 
 PANTHINO  In thy tail! 
 LAUNCE  Lose the tide, and the voyage, and the master, and 
 the service, and the tied! Why, man, if the river 
 were dry, I am able to fill it with my tears; if the 
 wind were down, I could drive the boat with my sighs. 
 PANTHINO  Come, come away, man; I was sent to call thee. 
 LAUNCE  Sir, call me what thou darest. 
 PANTHINO  Wilt thou go? 
 LAUNCE  Well, I will go. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Two Gentlemen of Verona  | Act 2, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 