SCENE III. The same. Two Gentlemen of Verona  Shakespeare homepage  |  Two Gentlemen of Verona  | Act 4, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. The same. 
 Enter EGLAMOUR  EGLAMOUR  This is the hour that Madam Silvia 
 Entreated me to call and know her mind: 
 There's some great matter she'ld employ me in. 
 Madam, madam! 

 Enter SILVIA above  SILVIA  Who calls? 
 EGLAMOUR  Your servant and your friend; 
 One that attends your ladyship's command. 
 SILVIA  Sir Eglamour, a thousand times good morrow. 
 EGLAMOUR  As many, worthy lady, to yourself: 
 According to your ladyship's impose, 
 I am thus early come to know what service 
 It is your pleasure to command me in. 
 SILVIA  O Eglamour, thou art a gentleman-- 
 Think not I flatter, for I swear I do not-- 
 Valiant, wise, remorseful, well accomplish'd: 
 Thou art not ignorant what dear good will 
 I bear unto the banish'd Valentine, 
 Nor how my father would enforce me marry 
 Vain Thurio, whom my very soul abhors. 
 Thyself hast loved; and I have heard thee say 
 No grief did ever come so near thy heart 
 As when thy lady and thy true love died, 
 Upon whose grave thou vow'dst pure chastity. 
 Sir Eglamour, I would to Valentine, 
 To Mantua, where I hear he makes abode; 
 And, for the ways are dangerous to pass, 
 I do desire thy worthy company, 
 Upon whose faith and honour I repose. 
 Urge not my father's anger, Eglamour, 
 But think upon my grief, a lady's grief, 
 And on the justice of my flying hence, 
 To keep me from a most unholy match, 
 Which heaven and fortune still rewards with plagues. 
 I do desire thee, even from a heart 
 As full of sorrows as the sea of sands, 
 To bear me company and go with me: 
 If not, to hide what I have said to thee, 
 That I may venture to depart alone. 
 EGLAMOUR  Madam, I pity much your grievances; 
 Which since I know they virtuously are placed, 
 I give consent to go along with you, 
 Recking as little what betideth me 
 As much I wish all good befortune you. 
 When will you go? 
 SILVIA  This evening coming. 
 EGLAMOUR  Where shall I meet you? 
 SILVIA  At Friar Patrick's cell, 
 Where I intend holy confession. 
 EGLAMOUR  I will not fail your ladyship. Good morrow, gentle lady. 
 SILVIA  Good morrow, kind Sir Eglamour. 

 Exeunt severally  Shakespeare homepage  |  Two Gentlemen of Verona  | Act 4, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 