SCENE III. A road near the Shepherd's cottage. Winter's Tale  Shakespeare homepage  |  Winter's Tale  | Act 4, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE III. A road near the Shepherd's cottage. 
 Enter AUTOLYCUS, singing  AUTOLYCUS  When daffodils begin to peer, 
 With heigh! the doxy over the dale, 
 Why, then comes in the sweet o' the year; 
 For the red blood reigns in the winter's pale. 
 The white sheet bleaching on the hedge, 
 With heigh! the sweet birds, O, how they sing! 
 Doth set my pugging tooth on edge; 
 For a quart of ale is a dish for a king. 
 The lark, that tirra-lyra chants, 
 With heigh! with heigh! the thrush and the jay, 
 Are summer songs for me and my aunts, 
 While we lie tumbling in the hay. 
 I have served Prince Florizel and in my time 
 wore three-pile; but now I am out of service: 
 But shall I go mourn for that, my dear? 
 The pale moon shines by night: 
 And when I wander here and there, 
 I then do most go right. 
 If tinkers may have leave to live, 
 And bear the sow-skin budget, 
 Then my account I well may, give, 
 And in the stocks avouch it. 
 My traffic is sheets; when the kite builds, look to 
 lesser linen. My father named me Autolycus; who 
 being, as I am, littered under Mercury, was likewise 
 a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles. With die and 
 drab I purchased this caparison, and my revenue is 
 the silly cheat. Gallows and knock are too powerful 
 on the highway: beating and hanging are terrors to 
 me: for the life to come, I sleep out the thought 
 of it. A prize! a prize! 

 Enter Clown  Clown  Let me see: every 'leven wether tods; every tod 
 yields pound and odd shilling; fifteen hundred 
 shorn. what comes the wool to? 
 AUTOLYCUS  [Aside] 
 If the springe hold, the cock's mine. 
 Clown  I cannot do't without counters. Let me see; what am 
 I to buy for our sheep-shearing feast? Three pound 
 of sugar, five pound of currants, rice,--what will 
 this sister of mine do with rice? But my father 
 hath made her mistress of the feast, and she lays it 
 on. She hath made me four and twenty nose-gays for 
 the shearers, three-man-song-men all, and very good 
 ones; but they are most of them means and bases; but 
 one puritan amongst them, and he sings psalms to 
 horn-pipes. I must have saffron to colour the warden 
 pies; mace; dates?--none, that's out of my note; 
 nutmegs, seven; a race or two of ginger, but that I 
 may beg; four pound of prunes, and as many of 
 raisins o' the sun. 
 AUTOLYCUS  O that ever I was born! 

 Grovelling on the ground  Clown  I' the name of me-- 
 AUTOLYCUS  O, help me, help me! pluck but off these rags; and 
 then, death, death! 
 Clown  Alack, poor soul! thou hast need of more rags to lay 
 on thee, rather than have these off. 
 AUTOLYCUS  O sir, the loathsomeness of them offends me more 
 than the stripes I have received, which are mighty 
 ones and millions. 
 Clown  Alas, poor man! a million of beating may come to a 
 great matter. 
 AUTOLYCUS  I am robbed, sir, and beaten; my money and apparel 
 ta'en from me, and these detestable things put upon 
 me. 
 Clown  What, by a horseman, or a footman? 
 AUTOLYCUS  A footman, sweet sir, a footman. 
 Clown  Indeed, he should be a footman by the garments he 
 has left with thee: if this be a horseman's coat, 
 it hath seen very hot service. Lend me thy hand, 
 I'll help thee: come, lend me thy hand. 
 AUTOLYCUS  O, good sir, tenderly, O! 
 Clown  Alas, poor soul! 
 AUTOLYCUS  O, good sir, softly, good sir! I fear, sir, my 
 shoulder-blade is out. 
 Clown  How now! canst stand? 
 AUTOLYCUS  [Picking his pocket] 
 Softly, dear sir; good sir, softly. You ha' done me 
 a charitable office. 
 Clown  Dost lack any money? I have a little money for thee. 
 AUTOLYCUS  No, good sweet sir; no, I beseech you, sir: I have 
 a kinsman not past three quarters of a mile hence, 
 unto whom I was going; I shall there have money, or 
 any thing I want: offer me no money, I pray you; 
 that kills my heart. 
 Clown  What manner of fellow was he that robbed you? 
 AUTOLYCUS  A fellow, sir, that I have known to go about with 
 troll-my-dames; I knew him once a servant of the 
 prince: I cannot tell, good sir, for which of his 
 virtues it was, but he was certainly whipped out of the court. 
 Clown  His vices, you would say; there's no virtue whipped 
 out of the court: they cherish it to make it stay 
 there; and yet it will no more but abide. 
 AUTOLYCUS  Vices, I would say, sir. I know this man well: he 
 hath been since an ape-bearer; then a 
 process-server, a bailiff; then he compassed a 
 motion of the Prodigal Son, and married a tinker's 
 wife within a mile where my land and living lies; 
 and, having flown over many knavish professions, he 
 settled only in rogue: some call him Autolycus. 
 Clown  Out upon him! prig, for my life, prig: he haunts 
 wakes, fairs and bear-baitings. 
 AUTOLYCUS  Very true, sir; he, sir, he; that's the rogue that 
 put me into this apparel. 
 Clown  Not a more cowardly rogue in all Bohemia: if you had 
 but looked big and spit at him, he'ld have run. 
 AUTOLYCUS  I must confess to you, sir, I am no fighter: I am 
 false of heart that way; and that he knew, I warrant 
 him. 
 Clown  How do you now? 
 AUTOLYCUS  Sweet sir, much better than I was; I can stand and 
 walk: I will even take my leave of you, and pace 
 softly towards my kinsman's. 
 Clown  Shall I bring thee on the way? 
 AUTOLYCUS  No, good-faced sir; no, sweet sir. 
 Clown  Then fare thee well: I must go buy spices for our 
 sheep-shearing. 
 AUTOLYCUS  Prosper you, sweet sir! 

 Exit Clown  Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice. 
 I'll be with you at your sheep-shearing too: if I 
 make not this cheat bring out another and the 
 shearers prove sheep, let me be unrolled and my name 
 put in the book of virtue! 

 Sings  Jog on, jog on, the foot-path way, 
 And merrily hent the stile-a: 
 A merry heart goes all the day, 
 Your sad tires in a mile-a. 

 Exit  Shakespeare homepage  |  Winter's Tale  | Act 4, Scene 3 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 