SCENE II. Before LEONTES' palace. Winter's Tale  Shakespeare homepage  |  Winter's Tale  | Act 5, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. Before LEONTES' palace. 
 Enter AUTOLYCUS and a Gentleman  AUTOLYCUS  Beseech you, sir, were you present at this relation? 
 First Gentleman  I was by at the opening of the fardel, heard the old 
 shepherd deliver the manner how he found it: 
 whereupon, after a little amazedness, we were all 
 commanded out of the chamber; only this methought I 
 heard the shepherd say, he found the child. 
 AUTOLYCUS  I would most gladly know the issue of it. 
 First Gentleman  I make a broken delivery of the business; but the 
 changes I perceived in the king and Camillo were 
 very notes of admiration: they seemed almost, with 
 staring on one another, to tear the cases of their 
 eyes; there was speech in their dumbness, language 
 in their very gesture; they looked as they had heard 
 of a world ransomed, or one destroyed: a notable 
 passion of wonder appeared in them; but the wisest 
 beholder, that knew no more but seeing, could not 
 say if the importance were joy or sorrow; but in the 
 extremity of the one, it must needs be. 

 Enter another Gentleman  Here comes a gentleman that haply knows more. 
 The news, Rogero? 
 Second Gentleman  Nothing but bonfires: the oracle is fulfilled; the 
 king's daughter is found: such a deal of wonder is 
 broken out within this hour that ballad-makers 
 cannot be able to express it. 

 Enter a third Gentleman  Here comes the Lady Paulina's steward: he can 
 deliver you more. How goes it now, sir? this news 
 which is called true is so like an old tale, that 
 the verity of it is in strong suspicion: has the king 
 found his heir? 
 Third Gentleman  Most true, if ever truth were pregnant by 
 circumstance: that which you hear you'll swear you 
 see, there is such unity in the proofs. The mantle 
 of Queen Hermione's, her jewel about the neck of it, 
 the letters of Antigonus found with it which they 
 know to be his character, the majesty of the 
 creature in resemblance of the mother, the affection 
 of nobleness which nature shows above her breeding, 
 and many other evidences proclaim her with all 
 certainty to be the king's daughter. Did you see 
 the meeting of the two kings? 
 Second Gentleman  No. 
 Third Gentleman  Then have you lost a sight, which was to be seen, 
 cannot be spoken of. There might you have beheld one 
 joy crown another, so and in such manner that it 
 seemed sorrow wept to take leave of them, for their 
 joy waded in tears. There was casting up of eyes, 
 holding up of hands, with countenances of such 
 distraction that they were to be known by garment, 
 not by favour. Our king, being ready to leap out of 
 himself for joy of his found daughter, as if that 
 joy were now become a loss, cries 'O, thy mother, 
 thy mother!' then asks Bohemia forgiveness; then 
 embraces his son-in-law; then again worries he his 
 daughter with clipping her; now he thanks the old 
 shepherd, which stands by like a weather-bitten 
 conduit of many kings' reigns. I never heard of such 
 another encounter, which lames report to follow it 
 and undoes description to do it. 
 Second Gentleman  What, pray you, became of Antigonus, that carried 
 hence the child? 
 Third Gentleman  Like an old tale still, which will have matter to 
 rehearse, though credit be asleep and not an ear 
 open. He was torn to pieces with a bear: this 
 avouches the shepherd's son; who has not only his 
 innocence, which seems much, to justify him, but a 
 handkerchief and rings of his that Paulina knows. 
 First Gentleman  What became of his bark and his followers? 
 Third Gentleman  Wrecked the same instant of their master's death and 
 in the view of the shepherd: so that all the 
 instruments which aided to expose the child were 
 even then lost when it was found. But O, the noble 
 combat that 'twixt joy and sorrow was fought in 
 Paulina! She had one eye declined for the loss of 
 her husband, another elevated that the oracle was 
 fulfilled: she lifted the princess from the earth, 
 and so locks her in embracing, as if she would pin 
 her to her heart that she might no more be in danger 
 of losing. 
 First Gentleman  The dignity of this act was worth the audience of 
 kings and princes; for by such was it acted. 
 Third Gentleman  One of the prettiest touches of all and that which 
 angled for mine eyes, caught the water though not 
 the fish, was when, at the relation of the queen's 
 death, with the manner how she came to't bravely 
 confessed and lamented by the king, how 
 attentiveness wounded his daughter; till, from one 
 sign of dolour to another, she did, with an 'Alas,' 
 I would fain say, bleed tears, for I am sure my 
 heart wept blood. Who was most marble there changed 
 colour; some swooned, all sorrowed: if all the world 
 could have seen 't, the woe had been universal. 
 First Gentleman  Are they returned to the court? 
 Third Gentleman  No: the princess hearing of her mother's statue, 
 which is in the keeping of Paulina,--a piece many 
 years in doing and now newly performed by that rare 
 Italian master, Julio Romano, who, had he himself 
 eternity and could put breath into his work, would 
 beguile Nature of her custom, so perfectly he is her 
 ape: he so near to Hermione hath done Hermione that 
 they say one would speak to her and stand in hope of 
 answer: thither with all greediness of affection 
 are they gone, and there they intend to sup. 
 Second Gentleman  I thought she had some great matter there in hand; 
 for she hath privately twice or thrice a day, ever 
 since the death of Hermione, visited that removed 
 house. Shall we thither and with our company piece 
 the rejoicing? 
 First Gentleman  Who would be thence that has the benefit of access? 
 every wink of an eye some new grace will be born: 
 our absence makes us unthrifty to our knowledge. 
 Let's along. 

 Exeunt Gentlemen  AUTOLYCUS  Now, had I not the dash of my former life in me, 
 would preferment drop on my head. I brought the old 
 man and his son aboard the prince: told him I heard 
 them talk of a fardel and I know not what: but he 
 at that time, overfond of the shepherd's daughter, 
 so he then took her to be, who began to be much 
 sea-sick, and himself little better, extremity of 
 weather continuing, this mystery remained 
 undiscovered. But 'tis all one to me; for had I 
 been the finder out of this secret, it would not 
 have relished among my other discredits. 

 Enter Shepherd and Clown  Here come those I have done good to against my will, 
 and already appearing in the blossoms of their fortune. 
 Shepherd  Come, boy; I am past moe children, but thy sons and 
 daughters will be all gentlemen born. 
 Clown  You are well met, sir. You denied to fight with me 
 this other day, because I was no gentleman born. 
 See you these clothes? say you see them not and 
 think me still no gentleman born: you were best say 
 these robes are not gentlemen born: give me the 
 lie, do, and try whether I am not now a gentleman born. 
 AUTOLYCUS  I know you are now, sir, a gentleman born. 
 Clown  Ay, and have been so any time these four hours. 
 Shepherd  And so have I, boy. 
 Clown  So you have: but I was a gentleman born before my 
 father; for the king's son took me by the hand, and 
 called me brother; and then the two kings called my 
 father brother; and then the prince my brother and 
 the princess my sister called my father father; and 
 so we wept, and there was the first gentleman-like 
 tears that ever we shed. 
 Shepherd  We may live, son, to shed many more. 
 Clown  Ay; or else 'twere hard luck, being in so 
 preposterous estate as we are. 
 AUTOLYCUS  I humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all the 
 faults I have committed to your worship and to give 
 me your good report to the prince my master. 
 Shepherd  Prithee, son, do; for we must be gentle, now we are 
 gentlemen. 
 Clown  Thou wilt amend thy life? 
 AUTOLYCUS  Ay, an it like your good worship. 
 Clown  Give me thy hand: I will swear to the prince thou 
 art as honest a true fellow as any is in Bohemia. 
 Shepherd  You may say it, but not swear it. 
 Clown  Not swear it, now I am a gentleman? Let boors and 
 franklins say it, I'll swear it. 
 Shepherd  How if it be false, son? 
 Clown  If it be ne'er so false, a true gentleman may swear 
 it in the behalf of his friend: and I'll swear to 
 the prince thou art a tall fellow of thy hands and 
 that thou wilt not be drunk; but I know thou art no 
 tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt be 
 drunk: but I'll swear it, and I would thou wouldst 
 be a tall fellow of thy hands. 
 AUTOLYCUS  I will prove so, sir, to my power. 
 Clown  Ay, by any means prove a tall fellow: if I do not 
 wonder how thou darest venture to be drunk, not 
 being a tall fellow, trust me not. Hark! the kings 
 and the princes, our kindred, are going to see the 
 queen's picture. Come, follow us: we'll be thy 
 good masters. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Winter's Tale  | Act 5, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 