SCENE I. A room in LEONTES' palace. Winter's Tale  Shakespeare homepage  |  Winter's Tale  | Act 2, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE I. A room in LEONTES' palace. 
 Enter HERMIONE, MAMILLIUS, and Ladies  HERMIONE  Take the boy to you: he so troubles me, 
 'Tis past enduring. 
 First Lady  Come, my gracious lord, 
 Shall I be your playfellow? 
 MAMILLIUS  No, I'll none of you. 
 First Lady  Why, my sweet lord? 
 MAMILLIUS  You'll kiss me hard and speak to me as if 
 I were a baby still. I love you better. 
 Second Lady  And why so, my lord? 
 MAMILLIUS  Not for because 
 Your brows are blacker; yet black brows, they say, 
 Become some women best, so that there be not 
 Too much hair there, but in a semicircle 
 Or a half-moon made with a pen. 
 Second Lady  Who taught you this? 
 MAMILLIUS  I learnt it out of women's faces. Pray now 
 What colour are your eyebrows? 
 First Lady  Blue, my lord. 
 MAMILLIUS  Nay, that's a mock: I have seen a lady's nose 
 That has been blue, but not her eyebrows. 
 First Lady  Hark ye; 
 The queen your mother rounds apace: we shall 
 Present our services to a fine new prince 
 One of these days; and then you'ld wanton with us, 
 If we would have you. 
 Second Lady  She is spread of late 
 Into a goodly bulk: good time encounter her! 
 HERMIONE  What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come, sir, now 
 I am for you again: pray you, sit by us, 
 And tell 's a tale. 
 MAMILLIUS  Merry or sad shall't be? 
 HERMIONE  As merry as you will. 
 MAMILLIUS  A sad tale's best for winter: I have one 
 Of sprites and goblins. 
 HERMIONE  Let's have that, good sir. 
 Come on, sit down: come on, and do your best 
 To fright me with your sprites; you're powerful at it. 
 MAMILLIUS  There was a man-- 
 HERMIONE  Nay, come, sit down; then on. 
 MAMILLIUS  Dwelt by a churchyard: I will tell it softly; 
 Yond crickets shall not hear it. 
 HERMIONE  Come on, then, 
 And give't me in mine ear. 

 Enter LEONTES, with ANTIGONUS, Lords and others  LEONTES  Was he met there? his train? Camillo with him? 
 First Lord  Behind the tuft of pines I met them; never 
 Saw I men scour so on their way: I eyed them 
 Even to their ships. 
 LEONTES  How blest am I 
 In my just censure, in my true opinion! 
 Alack, for lesser knowledge! how accursed 
 In being so blest! There may be in the cup 
 A spider steep'd, and one may drink, depart, 
 And yet partake no venom, for his knowledge 
 Is not infected: but if one present 
 The abhorr'd ingredient to his eye, make known 
 How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides, 
 With violent hefts. I have drunk, 
 and seen the spider. 
 Camillo was his help in this, his pander: 
 There is a plot against my life, my crown; 
 All's true that is mistrusted: that false villain 
 Whom I employ'd was pre-employ'd by him: 
 He has discover'd my design, and I 
 Remain a pinch'd thing; yea, a very trick 
 For them to play at will. How came the posterns 
 So easily open? 
 First Lord  By his great authority; 
 Which often hath no less prevail'd than so 
 On your command. 
 LEONTES  I know't too well. 
 Give me the boy: I am glad you did not nurse him: 
 Though he does bear some signs of me, yet you 
 Have too much blood in him. 
 HERMIONE  What is this? sport? 
 LEONTES  Bear the boy hence; he shall not come about her; 
 Away with him! and let her sport herself 
 With that she's big with; for 'tis Polixenes 
 Has made thee swell thus. 
 HERMIONE  But I'ld say he had not, 
 And I'll be sworn you would believe my saying, 
 Howe'er you lean to the nayward. 
 LEONTES  You, my lords, 
 Look on her, mark her well; be but about 
 To say 'she is a goodly lady,' and 
 The justice of your bearts will thereto add 
 'Tis pity she's not honest, honourable:' 
 Praise her but for this her without-door form, 
 Which on my faith deserves high speech, and straight 
 The shrug, the hum or ha, these petty brands 
 That calumny doth use--O, I am out-- 
 That mercy does, for calumny will sear 
 Virtue itself: these shrugs, these hums and ha's, 
 When you have said 'she's goodly,' come between 
 Ere you can say 'she's honest:' but be 't known, 
 From him that has most cause to grieve it should be, 
 She's an adulteress. 
 HERMIONE  Should a villain say so, 
 The most replenish'd villain in the world, 
 He were as much more villain: you, my lord, 
 Do but mistake. 
 LEONTES  You have mistook, my lady, 
 Polixenes for Leontes: O thou thing! 
 Which I'll not call a creature of thy place, 
 Lest barbarism, making me the precedent, 
 Should a like language use to all degrees 
 And mannerly distinguishment leave out 
 Betwixt the prince and beggar: I have said 
 She's an adulteress; I have said with whom: 
 More, she's a traitor and Camillo is 
 A federary with her, and one that knows 
 What she should shame to know herself 
 But with her most vile principal, that she's 
 A bed-swerver, even as bad as those 
 That vulgars give bold'st titles, ay, and privy 
 To this their late escape. 
 HERMIONE  No, by my life. 
 Privy to none of this. How will this grieve you, 
 When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that 
 You thus have publish'd me! Gentle my lord, 
 You scarce can right me throughly then to say 
 You did mistake. 
 LEONTES  No; if I mistake 
 In those foundations which I build upon, 
 The centre is not big enough to bear 
 A school-boy's top. Away with her! to prison! 
 He who shall speak for her is afar off guilty 
 But that he speaks. 
 HERMIONE  There's some ill planet reigns: 
 I must be patient till the heavens look 
 With an aspect more favourable. Good my lords, 
 I am not prone to weeping, as our sex 
 Commonly are; the want of which vain dew 
 Perchance shall dry your pities: but I have 
 That honourable grief lodged here which burns 
 Worse than tears drown: beseech you all, my lords, 
 With thoughts so qualified as your charities 
 Shall best instruct you, measure me; and so 
 The king's will be perform'd! 
 LEONTES  Shall I be heard? 
 HERMIONE  Who is't that goes with me? Beseech your highness, 
 My women may be with me; for you see 
 My plight requires it. Do not weep, good fools; 
 There is no cause: when you shall know your mistress 
 Has deserved prison, then abound in tears 
 As I come out: this action I now go on 
 Is for my better grace. Adieu, my lord: 
 I never wish'd to see you sorry; now 
 I trust I shall. My women, come; you have leave. 
 LEONTES  Go, do our bidding; hence! 

 Exit HERMIONE, guarded; with Ladies  First Lord  Beseech your highness, call the queen again. 
 ANTIGONUS  Be certain what you do, sir, lest your justice 
 Prove violence; in the which three great ones suffer, 
 Yourself, your queen, your son. 
 First Lord  For her, my lord, 
 I dare my life lay down and will do't, sir, 
 Please you to accept it, that the queen is spotless 
 I' the eyes of heaven and to you; I mean, 
 In this which you accuse her. 
 ANTIGONUS  If it prove 
 She's otherwise, I'll keep my stables where 
 I lodge my wife; I'll go in couples with her; 
 Than when I feel and see her no farther trust her; 
 For every inch of woman in the world, 
 Ay, every dram of woman's flesh is false, If she be. 
 LEONTES  Hold your peaces. 
 First Lord  Good my lord,-- 
 ANTIGONUS  It is for you we speak, not for ourselves: 
 You are abused and by some putter-on 
 That will be damn'd for't; would I knew the villain, 
 I would land-damn him. Be she honour-flaw'd, 
 I have three daughters; the eldest is eleven 
 The second and the third, nine, and some five; 
 If this prove true, they'll pay for't: 
 by mine honour, 
 I'll geld 'em all; fourteen they shall not see, 
 To bring false generations: they are co-heirs; 
 And I had rather glib myself than they 
 Should not produce fair issue. 
 LEONTES  Cease; no more. 
 You smell this business with a sense as cold 
 As is a dead man's nose: but I do see't and feel't 
 As you feel doing thus; and see withal 
 The instruments that feel. 
 ANTIGONUS  If it be so, 
 We need no grave to bury honesty: 
 There's not a grain of it the face to sweeten 
 Of the whole dungy earth. 
 LEONTES  What! lack I credit? 
 First Lord  I had rather you did lack than I, my lord, 
 Upon this ground; and more it would content me 
 To have her honour true than your suspicion, 
 Be blamed for't how you might. 
 LEONTES  Why, what need we 
 Commune with you of this, but rather follow 
 Our forceful instigation? Our prerogative 
 Calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness 
 Imparts this; which if you, or stupefied 
 Or seeming so in skill, cannot or will not 
 Relish a truth like us, inform yourselves 
 We need no more of your advice: the matter, 
 The loss, the gain, the ordering on't, is all 
 Properly ours. 
 ANTIGONUS  And I wish, my liege, 
 You had only in your silent judgment tried it, 
 Without more overture. 
 LEONTES  How could that be? 
 Either thou art most ignorant by age, 
 Or thou wert born a fool. Camillo's flight, 
 Added to their familiarity, 
 Which was as gross as ever touch'd conjecture, 
 That lack'd sight only, nought for approbation 
 But only seeing, all other circumstances 
 Made up to the deed, doth push on this proceeding: 
 Yet, for a greater confirmation, 
 For in an act of this importance 'twere 
 Most piteous to be wild, I have dispatch'd in post 
 To sacred Delphos, to Apollo's temple, 
 Cleomenes and Dion, whom you know 
 Of stuff'd sufficiency: now from the oracle 
 They will bring all; whose spiritual counsel had, 
 Shall stop or spur me. Have I done well? 
 First Lord  Well done, my lord. 
 LEONTES  Though I am satisfied and need no more 
 Than what I know, yet shall the oracle 
 Give rest to the minds of others, such as he 
 Whose ignorant credulity will not 
 Come up to the truth. So have we thought it good 
 From our free person she should be confined, 
 Lest that the treachery of the two fled hence 
 Be left her to perform. Come, follow us; 
 We are to speak in public; for this business 
 Will raise us all. 
 ANTIGONUS  [Aside] 
 To laughter, as I take it, 
 If the good truth were known. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Winter's Tale  | Act 2, Scene 1 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 