SCENE II. A prison. Winter's Tale  Shakespeare homepage  |  Winter's Tale  | Act 2, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene  SCENE II. A prison. 
 Enter PAULINA, a Gentleman, and Attendants  PAULINA  The keeper of the prison, call to him; 
 let him have knowledge who I am. 

 Exit Gentleman  Good lady, 
 No court in Europe is too good for thee; 
 What dost thou then in prison? 

 Re-enter Gentleman, with the Gaoler  Now, good sir, 
 You know me, do you not? 
 Gaoler  For a worthy lady 
 And one whom much I honour. 
 PAULINA  Pray you then, 
 Conduct me to the queen. 
 Gaoler  I may not, madam: 
 To the contrary I have express commandment. 
 PAULINA  Here's ado, 
 To lock up honesty and honour from 
 The access of gentle visitors! 
 Is't lawful, pray you, 
 To see her women? any of them? Emilia? 
 Gaoler  So please you, madam, 
 To put apart these your attendants, I 
 Shall bring Emilia forth. 
 PAULINA  I pray now, call her. 
 Withdraw yourselves. 

 Exeunt Gentleman and Attendants  Gaoler  And, madam, 
 I must be present at your conference. 
 PAULINA  Well, be't so, prithee. 

 Exit Gaoler  Here's such ado to make no stain a stain 
 As passes colouring. 

 Re-enter Gaoler, with EMILIA  Dear gentlewoman, 
 How fares our gracious lady? 
 EMILIA  As well as one so great and so forlorn 
 May hold together: on her frights and griefs, 
 Which never tender lady hath born greater, 
 She is something before her time deliver'd. 
 PAULINA  A boy? 
 EMILIA  A daughter, and a goodly babe, 
 Lusty and like to live: the queen receives 
 Much comfort in't; says 'My poor prisoner, 
 I am innocent as you.' 
 PAULINA  I dare be sworn 
 These dangerous unsafe lunes i' the king, 
 beshrew them! 
 He must be told on't, and he shall: the office 
 Becomes a woman best; I'll take't upon me: 
 If I prove honey-mouth'd let my tongue blister 
 And never to my red-look'd anger be 
 The trumpet any more. Pray you, Emilia, 
 Commend my best obedience to the queen: 
 If she dares trust me with her little babe, 
 I'll show't the king and undertake to be 
 Her advocate to the loud'st. We do not know 
 How he may soften at the sight o' the child: 
 The silence often of pure innocence 
 Persuades when speaking fails. 
 EMILIA  Most worthy madam, 
 Your honour and your goodness is so evident 
 That your free undertaking cannot miss 
 A thriving issue: there is no lady living 
 So meet for this great errand. Please your ladyship 
 To visit the next room, I'll presently 
 Acquaint the queen of your most noble offer; 
 Who  but to-day hammer'd of this design, 
 But durst not tempt a minister of honour, 
 Lest she should be denied. 
 PAULINA  Tell her, Emilia. 
 I'll use that tongue I have: if wit flow from't 
 As boldness from my bosom, let 't not be doubted 
 I shall do good. 
 EMILIA  Now be you blest for it! 
 I'll to the queen: please you, 
 come something nearer. 
 Gaoler  Madam, if't please the queen to send the babe, 
 I know not what I shall incur to pass it, 
 Having no warrant. 
 PAULINA  You need not fear it, sir: 
 This child was prisoner to the womb and is 
 By law and process of great nature thence 
 Freed and enfranchised, not a party to 
 The anger of the king nor guilty of, 
 If any be, the trespass of the queen. 
 Gaoler  I do believe it. 
 PAULINA  Do not you fear: upon mine honour, 
 I will stand betwixt you and danger. 

 Exeunt  Shakespeare homepage  |  Winter's Tale  | Act 2, Scene 2 
 Previous scene  |  Next scene 